"Nay, but this dotage of our general’s O’erflows the measure. Those his goodly eyes, That o’er the files and musters of the war Have glowed like plated Mars, now bend, now turn Upon a tawny front. His captain’s heart, Which in the scuffles of great fights hath burst The buckles on his breast, reneges all temper And is become the bellows and the fan","No, our general’s infatuation is out of control. His eyes used to glow with pride when he reviewed his troops. Now his eyes devote themselves exclusively to a certain brown-skinned face. His heart used to burst the buckles on his breastplate in great fights, but now he’s lost all temperance and dedicates his heart to satisfying the lust of an Egyptian whore."
"Look where they come. Take but good note, and you shall see in him The triple pillar of the world transformed Into a strumpet’s fool. Behold and see.","Look at them. Take a good look, and you’ll see that one of the three men who rule the world has turned into a whore’s jester. Look and see."
"If it be love indeed, tell me how much.","If what you feel is really love, tell me how much."
There’s beggary in the love that can be reckoned.,It would be a pretty stingy love if it could be counted and calculated.
I’ll set a bourn how far to be beloved.,"I want to measure the extent of your love, to see how far it stretches."
"Then must thou needs find out new heaven, new earth.","Then you would have to go beyond heaven, beyond earth."
"News, my good lord, from Rome.","I have news from Rome, my good lord."
"Grates me, the sum.",Which irritaties me. Give me a summary.
"Fulvia perchance is angry. Or who knows If the scarce-bearded Caesar have not sent His powerful mandate to you, “Do this, or this. Take in that kingdom, and enfranchise that.","No, listen to it, Antony. Perhaps Fulvia Fulvia is Marc Antony’s wife. Fulvia is angry with you. Who knows, maybe the baby-faced Caesar Octavius Caesar was only in his twenties at this time, about twenty years younger than Antony. baby-faced Caesar has orders for you: “Do this, do that; conquer that kingdom, liberate this one. Do it or we’ll condemn you.”"
"How, my love?","What, my love?"
"Perchance? Nay, and most like. You must not stay here longer. Your dismission Is come from Caesar. Therefore hear it, Antony. Where’s Fulvia’s process? Caesar’s, I would say—both? Thou blushest, Antony, and that blood of thine Is Caesar’s homager. Else so thy cheek pays shame When shrill-tongued Fulvia scolds. The messengers!","Maybe? No, most likely. You can’t stay here any longer. Caesar has sent your dismissal, so pay attention, Antony. Where’s Fulvia’s summons—excuse me, I should have said Caesar’s. Or do Fulvia and Caesar both beckon you back to Rome? Call in the messengers and we’ll find out. As surely as I am the queen of Egypt, Antony, you’re blushing, which means you’re Caesar’s servant. Or that that bitch Fulvia still has the power to humiliate you. Call the messengers!"
"Let Rome in Tiber melt and the wide arch Kingdoms are clay. Our dungy earth alike Feeds beast as man. The nobleness of life Is to do thus, when such a mutual pair And such a twain can do ’t, in which I bind, We stand up peerless.","Let Rome be washed away in the Tiber Rome was built on the river Tiber. Let Rome be washed away in the Tiber and let the great empire fall. My place is here. Kingdoms are only dirt. The soil feeds animals as well as people, so how does having a kingdom separate humans from beasts? The noblest thing is to do what we’re doing, particularly when the couple is as well matched as we are. I demand that the world admit we are the perfect couple or else suffer the consequences."
"Excellent falsehood! Why did he marry Fulvia, and not love her? I’ll seem the fool I am not. Antony Will be himself.",(to herself) What an enormous lie! Why did he marry Fulvia if he didn’t love her? I’ll pretend to be a fool and believe him. He’ll never change.
But stirred by Cleopatra. Let’s not confound the time with conference harsh. There’s not a minute of our lives should stretch Without some pleasure now. What sport tonight?,"(overhearing the last sentence) Unless he is moved and inspired by Cleopatra. Now, since we love the feeling of being in love, let’s not spoil the mood with serious discussion. We shouldn’t spend a minute without some kind of amusement. What shall we do tonight?"
Hear the ambassadors.,Meet with the ambassadors.
"Fie, wrangling Queen! To weep, whose every passion fully strives To make itself, in thee, fair and admired! No messenger but thine, and all alone Tonight we’ll wander through the streets and note Last night you did desire it.—(to the MESSENGER ) Speak not to us.","Shame on you, stubborn Queen! Everything you do is attractive—scolding, laughing, crying—every emotion seems admirable when you express it. I won’t see any messengers but yours. Tonight we’ll wander through the streets and observe the people. Come, my Queen. That’s what you wanted to do last night. (to the MESSENGER ) Don’t talk to us."
Is Caesar with Antonius prized so slight?,Does Antony have so little respect for Caesar?
"Sir, sometimes when he is not Antony He comes too short of that great property","Sir, sometimes he’s like a different person, a person who can’t measure up to the former Antony."
"I am full sorry That he approves the common liar, who Thus speaks of him at Rome, but I will hope Of better deeds tomorrow. Rest you happy!","I’m sad to say this confirms the stories being told about him in Rome, which I had taken to be lies. Well, I’ll hope things change for the better soon. Have a good night!"
"Lord Alexas, sweet Alexas, most anything Alexas, almost most absolute Alexas, where’s the soothsayer that you praised so to th’ Queen? Oh that I knew this husband, which, you say, must charge his horns with garlands!","Lord Alexas, sweet Alexas, most anything Alexas, almost the most consummate Alexas, where’s the fortuneteller you recommended so highly to the Queen? Oh, I only wish I knew the name of that husband you said he predicted will have a cheating wife!"
Soothsayer!,(calling) Fortuneteller!
Your will?,What can I do for you?
"(to ALEXAS ) Is this the man? (to SOOTHSAYER ) Is ’t you, sir, that know things?",(to ALEXAS ) Is this the man you recommended? (to the FORTUNETELLER ) Are you the man who knows the future?
In nature’s infinite book of secrecy A little I can read.,I can understand a few of nature’s infinite secrets.
(to CHARMIAN )         Show him your hand.,(to CHARMIAN ) Give him your hand to read.
(to servants within) Bring in the banquet quickly. Wine enough Cleopatra’s health to drink.,"(to the servants) Bring the dessert in right away, and make sure there’s enough wine to toast Cleopatra’s health."
"(giving hand to SOOTHSAYER ) Good sir, give me good fortune.","(giving her hand to the FORTUNETELLER ) Kind sir, give me a good fortune."
"I make not, but foresee.",I don’t make fortunes; I only see them.
"Pray, then, foresee me one.",Then see a good one for me.
You shall be yet far fairer than you are.,Your beauty will be even greater than it is now.
(to the others) He means in flesh.,(to the others) He means I’ll get fat.
"No, you shall paint when you are old.","No, he means you’ll use makeup when you’re old."
Wrinkles forbid!,May my wrinkles forbid that!
Vex not his prescience. Be attentive.,Don’t joke about his predictions. Pay attention.
Hush!,Quiet!
You shall be more beloving than beloved.,You will love more than you are loved.
I had rather heat my liver with drinking.,"I would rather get passion from drink Passion was thought to originate in the liver, which could be stimulated by drink. I would rather get passion from drink than from love."
"Nay, hear him.",Just listen to him.
"Good now, some excellent fortune! Let me be married to three kings in a forenoon and widow them all. Let me have a child at fifty, to whom Herod of Jewry may do homage. Find me to marry me with Octavius Caesar, and companion me with my mistress.","Be kind now and tell me some excellent fortune. Tell me that I’ll marry three kings before noon and be widowed by all of them. Tell me I’ll have a child when I’m fifty who will be honored even by Herod of Judea Herod was the Roman governor of Israel at the time of Christ’s birth. In an attempt to kill Jesus, prophesied to become king of the Jews, Herod ordered the slaughter of all the infants in Bethlehem. Herod of Judea . Let me marry Octavius Caesar and become my Queen’s equal."
You shall outlive the lady whom you serve.,You will outlive the Queen.
"Oh, excellent! I love long life better than figs.","Oh, excellent! I love long life better than figs Figs were thought to resemble female genitalia. figs ."
You have seen and proved a fairer former fortune Than that which is to approach.,You have already had better fortune than the future will bring.
"Then belike my children shall have no names. Prithee, how many boys and wenches must I have?","Then my children will probably be illegitimate. Tell me, please: how many boys and girls will I have?"
"If every of your wishes had a womb, And fertile every wish, a million.","If every time you wished for a child you could have had one, you would have a million children."
"Out, fool! I forgive thee for a witch.","Get out of here, you fool! Since you’re a fortuneteller I won’t bring charges of witchcraft against you."
You think none but your sheets are privy to your wishes.,You seem to think no one outside of your bedroom knows what you wish.
"(to SOOTHSAYER ) Nay, come, tell Iras hers.",(to FORTUNETELLER ) Never mind. Tell Iras’s fortune.
We’ll know all our fortunes.,We’ll all want our fortune told.
"Mine, and most of our fortunes tonight, shall be—drunk to bed.",My fortune—like that of many of us tonight—is to go drunk to bed.
"(giving her hand to the SOOTHSAYER ) There’s a palm presages chastity, if nothing else.","(giving her hand to the FORTUNETELLER ) There’s a palm that will predict a chaste life, if nothing else."
E’en as the o’erflowing Nilus presageth famine.,"Like the overflowing Nile The Nile River overflowed its banks every year, irrigating the surrounding farmland and guaranteeing a good harvest. overflowing Nile predicts famine."
"Go, you wild bedfellow, you cannot soothsay.","Oh stop it, you lusty bed-hopper. You can’t see the future."
"Nay, if an oily palm be not a fruitful prognostication, I cannot scratch mine ear.—Prithee, tell her but a workaday fortune.","Well, if a moist palm isn’t a clear sign of promiscuity, then I can’t scratch my own ear. (to FORTUNETELLER ) Please, tell her an ordinary fortune."
Your fortunes are alike.,Your fortunes are the same.
"But how, but how? Give me particulars.",But how? How is that possible? Give me details.
I have said.,I’ve said what I have to say.
Am I not an inch of fortune better than she?,"Isn’t my fortune just a little better than hers? By an inch, even?"
"Well, if you were but an inch of fortune better than I, where would you choose it?","Well, if you could have just an inch of better fortune than me, where would you like the improvement?"
Not in my husband’s nose.,Not in my husband’s nose.
"Our worser thoughts heavens mend. Alexas! (to SOOTHSAYER ) Come, his fortune, his fortune! Oh, let him marry a woman that cannot go, sweet Isis, I beseech thee, and let her die too, and give him a worse, and let worse follow worse, till the worst of all follow him laughing to his grave, fifty-fold a cuckold! Good Isis, hear me this prayer, though thou deny me a matter of more weight, good Isis, I beseech thee!","May heaven save us from indecent thoughts! Alexas! (to the FORTUNETELLER ) Come and tell his fortune. Let him marry a woman he can’t satisfy, dear Isis Isis was Egypt’s primary female deity, generally associated with the earth, the moon, and fertility. Isis , I pray! And then let her die, and give him someone worse. Then let her die, and let her replacement be even worse. And so on until the last one, who is unfaithful with at least fifty other men and laughs at him until he dies. I beg you to grant my prayer, good Isis, even though it means you deny me something more important for myself. Good Isis, I beg you!"
"Amen, dear goddess, hear that prayer of the people! For, as it is a heartbreaking to see a handsome man loose-wived, so it is a deadly sorrow to behold a foul knave uncuckolded. Therefore, dear Isis, keep decorum, and fortune him accordingly.","Amen, dear goddess. Listen to our prayer. If it’s sad to see a handsome man with a cheating wife, it’s a tragedy to see an ugly thug with a wife who’s faithful. Therefore, dear Isis, do the right thing and give him the fortune he deserves."
Amen.,Amen.
"(to himself) Lo now, if it lay in their hands to make me a cuckold, they would make themselves whores but they’d do ’t.","(to himself) See! If they could make me a cuckold, they’d whore themselves in order to see it done."
Hush! Here comes Antony.,Quiet! Here comes Antony.
Not he. The Queen.,It’s not him; it’s the Queen.
Saw you my lord?,Have you seen my lord?
"No, lady.","No, lady."
Was he not here?,Wasn’t he here?
"No, madam.","No, madam."
"He was disposed to mirth, but on the sudden","He was in a good mood, and then suddenly he started thinking of Rome. Enobarbus?"
Madam?,Madam?
Seek him and bring him hither.— Where’s Alexas?,Find him and bring him here. Where’s Alexas?
Here at your service. My lord approaches.,"Here, at your service. Here comes my lord."
We will not look upon him. Go with us.,"I won’t see him. In the original text, Cleopatra refers to herself in the plural to denote her royal status. I won’t see him. Everyone come with me."
Fulvia thy wife first came into the field.,"Your wife, Fulvia, mustered her army first."
Against my brother Lucius?,Against my brother Lucius?
"Ay. But soon that war had end, and the time’s state Whose better issue in the war from Italy Upon the first encounter drave them.","Yes. But that war ended as soon as circumstances made it advisable for them to join together against Caesar. But in their very first battle, Caesar won and drove them out of Italy."
"Well, what worst?","Well, give me the worst news."
The nature of bad news infects the teller.,The bearer of bad news is often blamed for it.
"Things that are past are done, with me. ’Tis thus: Who tells me true, though in his tale lie death, I hear him as he flattered.","Only if the hearer is a fool or a coward. Go on. As far as I’m concerned, what’s past is done. It’s like this: as long as a person tells me the truth, even though it means my death, I will listen as though he praised me."
"Labienus— This is stiff news—hath with his Parthian force His conquering banner shook, from Syria To Lydia and to Ionia, Whilst—","The news is disturbing. Labienus Quintus Labienus was a Roman general charged with subduing Parthia, a hostile country in Asia Minor, and garnering Parthinian military support in the war against Antony and Octavius Caesar. When Cassius and Brutus were defeated, Labienus led the Parthians in a war against Rome, conquering some of the Roman territories in Asia along the way. Labienus , with the army he led in Parthia, has conquered all of Asia, all the way to the Euphrates River, including Syria, Lydia, and Ionia, while—"
"“Antony,” thou wouldst say.",“While Antony . . .” is what you want to say.
O my lord!,"Oh, my lord!"
"Name Cleopatra as she is called in Rome. Rail thou in Fulvia’s phrase, and taunt my faults With such full license as both truth and malice Have power to utter. Oh, then we bring forth weeds Is as our earing.","Speak plainly. Don’t tone down what the people are saying. Call Cleopatra what the Romans call her. Use Fulvia’s abusive language. Freely scold me for my faults with as much severity as an enemy with truth on his side. It’s easy to err when left to our own devices, but criticism helps us to see our faults and correct them."
Fare thee well awhile.,Good-bye for a while.
At your noble pleasure.,I’ll be at your service.
"From Sicyon, how, the news? Speak there.",What’s the news from Sicyon Sicyon is the town in Greece where Antony left Fulvia. Sicyon . Tell me.
The man from Sicyon—,The man from Sicyon—
Is there such an one?,Is he here?
He stays upon your will.,He’s waiting outside.
Let him appear.,Have him come in.
"These strong Egyptian fetters I must break, Or lose myself in dotage.",(to himself) I must break Cleopatra’s powerful hold over me or else I’ll lose myself in foolish infatuation.
What are you?,What’s your message?
Fulvia thy wife is dead.,"Your wife, Fulvia, is dead."
Where died she?,Where did she die?
"In Sicyon. Importeth thee to know, this bears.","In Sicyon. In this letter you’ll find details of her illness and other, more serious matters that concern you."
Forbear me.,Leave me.
"(to himself) There’s a great spirit gone! Thus did I desire it. What our contempts doth often hurl from us We wish it ours again. The present pleasure, The opposite of itself. She’s good, being gone. The hand could pluck her back that shoved her on. I must from this enchanting Queen break off. Ten thousand harms, more than the ills I know","(to himself) A great spirit has gone from the world! This is what I wanted. Once it’s gone, the very thing we reject becomes what we desire. What’s enjoyable one day becomes the opposite as time rolls around. Now that she’s gone, I want her. Now I would call her back, though I pushed her away. I have to break from this beguiling Queen. The time I’ve wasted here has caused ten thousand more problems than the ones I know about. (calling) Are you there, Enobarbus?"
"What’s your pleasure, sir?","What would you like, sir?"
I must with haste from hence.,I have to leave right away.
"Why, then, we kill all our women. We see how mortal an unkindness is to them. If they suffer our departure, death’s the word.","That will kill our lovers. We know how much they suffer if we are unkind to them. If we leave, it will feel like nothing less than death to them."
I must be gone.,I must be gone.
"Under a compelling occasion, let women die. It were pity to cast them away for nothing, though between them and a great cause they should be esteemed nothing. Cleopatra, catching but the least noise of this, dies instantly. I have seen her die twenty times upon far poorer moment. I do think there is mettle in death, which commits some loving act upon her, she hath such a celerity in dying.","If it’s that important, then let the women die. It would be a pity to throw them away for nothing, but if it’s a matter of choosing between them and a great cause, then they’re worthless. If Cleopatra hears even a breath of this, she’ll die immediately. I’ve seen her claim to be dying twenty times before, and for far less reason. I think there must be something invigorating about death, since she dies with such enthusiasm."
She is cunning past man’s thought.,She’s more cunning than anyone can imagine.
"Alack, sir, no, her passions are made of nothing but the finest part of pure love. We cannot call her winds and waters sighs and tears. They are greater storms and tempests than almanacs can report. This cannot be cunning in her. If it be, she makes a shower of rain as well as Jove.","Alas, sir, no, her feelings come from pure love, not cleverness. Her sighs and tears are like great winds and floods. She has more storms and tempests in her than a weather almanac. Her temper is not a trick or a skill—if it is, she can make it rain as well as Jove king of the Roman gods; commands thunder, lightning, and rain Jove ."
Would I had never seen her!,I wish I’d never seen her!
"O sir, you had then left unseen a wonderful piece of work which not to have been blessed withal would have discredited your travel.","Then you’d have missed an amazing piece of work, sir, and your trip would have been poorer for the loss."
Fulvia is dead.,Fulvia is dead.
Sir?,Pardon me?
Fulvia is dead.,Fulvia is dead.
Fulvia?,Fulvia?
Dead.,Dead.
"Why, sir, give the gods a thankful sacrifice. When it pleaseth their deities to take the wife of a man from him, it shows to man the tailors of the earth, comforting therein, that when old robes are worn out, there are members to make new. If there were no more women but Fulvia, then had you indeed a cut, and the case to be lamented. This grief is crowned with consolation. Your old smock brings forth a new petticoat, and indeed the tears live in an onion that should water this sorrow.","Then you should offer the gods a sacrifice to show your thanks. When a man’s wife dies, he can be comforted by the knowledge that there are replacements to be found. If Fulvia were the last woman on earth, there would be a reason to grieve. But in this way, grief and comfort appear together. The only kind of tears you should shed in this case are the kind you might get from holding an onion to your nose."
The business she hath broached in the state,I must go and continue the business Fulvia started.
"And the business you have broached here cannot be without you, especially that of Cleopatra’s, which wholly depends on your abode.","The business you began here needs you as well—especially the business with Cleopatra, which only you can attend to."
"No more light answers. Let our officers The cause of our expedience to the Queen And get her leave to part. For not alone The death of Fulvia, with more urgent touches, Do strongly speak to us, but the letters too Petition us at home. Sextus Pompeius Hath given the dare to Caesar and commands The empire of the sea. Our slippery people, Whose love is never linked to the deserver Pompey the Great and all his dignities Upon his son, who—high in name and power, Higher than both in blood and life—stands up For the main soldier, whose quality, going on, Which, like the courser’s hair, hath yet but life, And not a serpent’s poison. Say our pleasure, To such whose place is under us, requires Our quick remove from hence.","Enough of this frivolous talk. Give our officers notice of our intentions. I’ll tell the Queen the reason for our quick departure and get her permission to leave. Fulvia’s death and the pressing concerns related to it are not the only reasons I am eager to go; friends in Rome have also sent many letters advising my return. Sextus Pompeius has challenged Caesar. His fleet controls the sea. Our fickle citizens—who never reward service until that service is over—are now giving all the rights and honors won by Pompey the Great to his son, Sextus. Sextus has great honor and power, and his spirit and energy are even greater, all of which makes him the most formidable soldier in the empire. The empire may be in danger if he’s not restrained before he reaches his full potential. There are many troubles brewing now that have yet to become full-fledged threats. Like horse’s hairs dropped in a bucket of water, they come alive like snakes but as yet they bear no poison. This sentence refers to a popular belief of the time. Like horse’s hairs dropped in a bucket of water, they come alive like snakes but as yet they bear no poison. Relay our intentions to the officers who will be in charge of the move."
I shall do ’t.,I will.
Where is he?,Where is he?
I did not see him since.,I haven’t seen him recently.
"(to ALEXAS ) See where he is, who’s with him, what he does. I did not send you. If you find him sad, Say I am dancing. If in mirth, report","(to ALEXAS ) Find out where he is, who’s with him, and what he’s doing. Don’t tell him I sent you. If he’s sad, tell him I’m dancing. If he’s happy, say that I’ve suddenly taken sick. Hurry, and come back."
"Madam, methinks, if you did love him dearly, You do not hold the method to enforce The like from him.","Madam, I think if you love him so much, you aren’t using the best way to get him to reciprocate."
What should I do I do not?,What should I do that I’m not doing?
In each thing give him way. Cross him in nothing.,Always give him his way. Never contradict him.
Thou teachest like a fool the way to lose him.,You advise me like a fool. That’s the way to lose him.
"Tempt him not so too far. I wish, forbear. In time we hate that which we often fear.",Don’t push him too far. I wish you’d be patient. We come to hate that which controls us.
But here comes Antony.,But here comes Antony.
I am sick and sullen.,I am sick and sullen.
I am sorry to give breathing to my purpose—,I’m sorry to have to say this—
It cannot be thus long. The sides of nature Will not sustain it.,"Help me away from here, dear Charmian! I shall faint. I won’t be able to go on this way much longer. Human nature isn’t built to withstand this."
"Now, my dearest Queen—","Now, my dearest Queen—"
"Pray you, stand farther from me.","Please, stand farther away from me."
What’s the matter?,What’s the matter?
I know by that same eye there’s some good news. Would she had never given you leave to come! Let her not say ’tis I that keep you here. I have no power upon you. Hers you are.,"I can see in your eyes there’s been some good news. What, does your wife say you can come home? I wish she’d never let you come. Don’t let her say I kept you. I have no power over you. You belong to her."
The gods best know—,The gods know—
Oh never was there queen I saw the treasons planted.,"Oh, never has a queen been so betrayed as I have been. I knew from the first it would be this way."
Cleopatra—,Cleopatra—
"Why should I think you can be mine, and true— Though you in swearing shake the thronèd gods— Who have been false to Fulvia? Riotous madness, Which break themselves in swearing!","How could I have ever thought that you would be faithful and true, even though your vows of love shook the heavens themselves—you, who were unfaithful to Fulvia? It was wild insanity to believe promises made by the mouth and not the heart. Such false vows are broken as soon as they are spoken."
Most sweet Queen—,Most sweet Queen—
"Nay, pray you, seek no color for your going, But bid farewell and go. When you sued staying, Then was the time for words. No going then! Bliss in our brows’ bent, none our parts so poor But was a race of heaven. They are so still, Or thou, the greatest soldier of the world, Art turned the greatest liar.","No, please don’t try to excuse your departure. Just say good-bye and go. When you begged to stay, that was the time for words. You didn’t want to go then! You saw eternity in my lips and eyes, and happiness in the arch of my eyebrows. Then, all my parts seemed angelic to you. My features are still that beautiful—or else you, the greatest soldier in the world, have become the greatest liar by overpraising them."
"How now, lady?","What do you mean, lady?"
There were a heart in Egypt.,I wish I were as big and strong as you. Then you’d see the courage that lives in the Queen of Egypt.
"Hear me, Queen: The strong necessity of time commands Our services awhile, but my full heart Remains in use with you. Our Italy Makes his approaches to the port of Rome. Equality of two domestic powers Breed scrupulous faction. The hated, grown to strength, Are newly grown to love. The condemned Pompey, Into the hearts of such as have not thrived Upon the present state, whose numbers threaten; And quietness, grown sick of rest, would purge By any desperate change. My more particular, Is Fulvia’s death.","Listen to me, Queen. There is an emergency I must take care of, but my whole heart will remain here with you. My Italy is full of civil war. Sextus Pompeius is sailing toward the port of Rome. When two domestic opponents are equally matched—as we are against Pompey—factions will form on the smallest of pretexts. When a formerly hated man grows powerful, he suddenly finds himself with many supporters. Pompey, who was once condemned, now wields his father’s power, and all the citizens who have grievances against the government are joining him. Pompey’s numbers are steadily growing, and the government is ready to do something desperate. But my personal motivation—and that which should move you most to sanction my departure—is that Fulvia is dead."
"Though age from folly could not give me freedom, It does from childishness. Can Fulvia die?","I may not have outlived the foolishness of my youth, but I’m not that childishly naïve. Is it possible Fulvia is dead?"
"She’s dead, my Queen.","She’s dead, my Queen."
"The garboils she awaked, at the last, best, See when and where she died.","Look at this. Take your royal time and read about the quarrels she encouraged. And saving the best for last, read when and where she died."
"O most false love! Where be the sacred vials thou shouldst fill With sorrowful water? Now I see, I see,","Oh, unfaithful lover! You should be filling vials with your tears. Ancient Romans often placed vials of tears inside their friends’ funerary urns. You should be filling vials with your tears. Seeing how you take Fulvia’s death, I can see how you would react to mine."
"Quarrel no more, but be prepared to know The purposes I bear, which are or cease As you shall give th’ advice. By the fire That quickens Nilus’ slime, I go from hence As thou affects.","Stop arguing and listen to my plans. Whether I go ahead with them or not is completely up to you. I swear by the sun that when I leave here, it will be as your faithful servant. I will make either peace or war, whichever you prefer."
"Cut my lace, Charmian, come! But let it be. I am quickly ill, and well, So Antony loves.","Cut my corset laces, Charmian, so I can breathe. Hurry! No, leave it alone. I waver easily between sickness and health. Just as Antony loves."
And give true evidence to his love which stands An honorable trial.,"Control yourself, my precious Queen, and concede that my love is true. It has endured many genuine trials."
"So Fulvia told me. I prithee, turn aside and weep for her. Belong to Egypt. Good now, play one scene Of excellent dissembling, and let it look Like perfect honor.","That’s what Fulvia told me. I beg you, turn away and cry for her. Then say good-bye to me and tell me those tears were for my benefit. Good. Now perform a scene for me, using your excellent skills of playacting, and pretend that you’re being honorable and righteous."
You’ll heat my blood. No more.,You’ll make me angry. No more of this.
"You can do better yet, but this is meetly.","I know you can do better than that, but it’ll do for now."
"Now, by my sword—",I swear by my sword—
"And target. Still he mends. (to CHARMIAN ) But this is not the best. Look, prithee, Charmian, How this Herculean Roman does become The carriage of his chafe.","Swear by your shield, too! (to CHARMIAN ) He’s getting better, but still it’s not his best. See, Charmian, how well this mighty Roman portrays anger?"
"I’ll leave you, lady.","I’ll leave you, lady."
"Sir, you and I must part, but that’s not it. Sir, you and I have loved, but there’s not it, That you know well. Something it is I would— Oh, my oblivion is a very Antony,","Polite sir, let me say one thing. Sir, you and I must part company—no, that’s not it. Sir, you and I were lovers—no, that’s not it, either. You already know all that. There’s something I’d like to—oh, I’ve forgotten what I wanted to say. Just as Antony has forgotten me."
"But that your royalty Holds idleness your subject, I should take you For idleness itself.","If you weren’t the queen of immaturity, I’d think you were immaturity itself."
"’Tis sweating labor To bear such idleness so near the heart As Cleopatra this. But, sir, forgive me, Eye well to you. Your honor calls you hence. Therefore be deaf to my unpitied folly, And all the gods go with you! Upon your sword Sit laurel victory, and smooth success","It’s difficult to have such immaturity so close to my heart, but bear with me. Even the traits that become me most kill me when you don’t approve of them. Your honor is the reason you are leaving. So I beg you not to listen to my foolishness. May the gods be with you. May your sword be victorious and everything you do succeed."
"Let us go. Come. Our separation so abides and flies That thou, residing here, goes yet with me, And I, hence fleeting, here remain with thee. Away!","Let’s go. Come with me. Our imminent separation so occupies our thoughts that even though you stay here, you come with me, and even though I leave here, I stay with you."
"You may see, Lepidus, and henceforth know, It is not Caesar’s natural vice to hate Our great competitor. From Alexandria This is the news: he fishes, drinks, and wastes Than Cleopatra, nor the queen of Ptolemy More womanly than he; hardly gave audience, or Vouchsafed to think he had partners. You shall find there A man who is th’ abstract of all faults","Now you’ll see, Lepidus, that I don’t disdain our noble ally because of a personal whim. Here’s the news from Alexandra: Antony fishes, drinks, and celebrates all night. He’s become as frivolous and self-indulgent as Ptolemy Ptolemy was Pharaoh of Egypt and Cleopatra’s husband, now dead. (He was also her younger brother.) Ptolemy ’s queen, Cleopatra. He rarely attends to his duties or acknowledges he has partners to be considered. Here’s a man who is the epitome of all the vices known to man."
"I must not think there are Evils enough to darken all his goodness. His faults in him seem as the spots of heaven, More fiery by night’s blackness, hereditary Rather than purchased, what he cannot change","I can’t believe there could be enough vice in the world to outshine all the good in him. His faults stand out because they must be compared to all his virtues, like stars that shine brightly against the dark night sky. They’re more likely to be the result of inherited weakness than independent choice."
"You are too indulgent. Let’s grant, it is not Amiss to tumble on the bed of Ptolemy, To give a kingdom for a mirth, to sit And keep the turn of tippling with a slave, With knaves that smell of sweat. Say this becomes him— As his composure must be rare indeed Whom these things cannot blemish—yet must Antony No way excuse his foils when we do bear His vacancy with his voluptuousness, Full surfeits and the dryness of his bones Call on him for ’t. But to confound such time That drums him from his sport and speaks as loud As we rate boys who, being mature in knowledge, Pawn their experience to their present pleasure And so rebel to judgment.","You’re too forgiving. Let’s say, for argument’s sake, that it’s not improper to fool around with Ptolemy’s wife, or to trade a kingdom for a joke. That it’s fine to engage in drinking matches with inferiors, or stumble drunkenly through the streets in the middle of the day, or get into fist fights with sweaty servants. Even if we said that this behavior suits him—though only a man with a perfect character could avoid being disgraced by such antics—there’s no excuse for the extra work we’ve had to take on while he’s been off amusing himself. If he’s been spending his leisure time in lustful pursuits, then he’ll be punished with venereal diseases, and that’s his business. But he’s wasting time and resources vital to our cause and endangering both his position and ours. He should be chastised, like any boy who knows what’s right but chooses to satisfy his desires regardless."
Here’s more news.,Here’s more news.
"Thy biddings have been done, and every hour, How ’tis abroad. Pompey is strong at sea, And it appears he is beloved of those That only have feared Caesar. To the ports The discontents repair, and men’s reports","We’ve followed your commands, lord Caesar. You shall have hourly updates regarding the situation at sea. Pompey has a strong navy. All the people who only stayed with you out of fear are gathering at the port to join him, in the opinion he’s been treated unfairly."
"I should have known no less. It hath been taught us from the primal state That he which is was wished until he were, And the ebbed man, ne’er loved till ne’er worth love, Comes deared by being lacked. This common body, Goes to and back, lackeying the varying tide To rot itself with motion.","I should have known it. It’s been this way ever since the first government was organized. People will transfer their support to a strong figure until he becomes their actual leader. Then they will value their former leader, even though the loss of their support has made him powerless. The common crowd changes like the tide, to and fro, serving whoever is on the rise. Their power is worn away by their fickleness."
"Caesar, I bring thee word Menecrates and Menas, famous pirates, With keels of every kind. Many hot inroads They make in Italy—the borders maritime Lack blood to think on ’t—and flush youth revolt. No vessel can peep forth, but ’tis as soon Than could his war resisted.","Caesar, I have news about Menecrates and Menas, notorious pirates who prowl the sea in a variety of ships. They’ve made many raids upon Italy—and the naval patrols go pale at even the thought of resisting them. The young, energetic men are joining Pompey. These pirates can capture a ship as soon as it leaves the harbor, since the simple mention of the name “Pompey” carries as much power as a fleet of troops in battle."
"Antony, Leave thy lascivious wassails. When thou once Wast beaten from Modena, where thou slew’st Hirtius and Pansa, consuls, at thy heel Though daintily brought up, with patience more Than savages could suffer. Thou didst drink The stale of horses and the gilded puddle Which beasts would cough at. Thy palate then did deign Yea, like the stag, when snow the pasture sheets, The barks of trees thou browsèd. On the Alps It is reported thou didst eat strange flesh, Which some did die to look on. And all this— Was borne so like a soldier, that thy cheek So much as lanked not.","Antony, it’s time to stop your wild hedonism. When you were defeated at the battle of Modena—where you killed the consuls, Hirtius and Pansa—and then driven away, you had to face hunger and thirst. And even though you were brought up as a gentleman, you patiently tolerated more hardships than savages could withstand. You drank horses’ urine and water from scum-covered puddles that even animals would refuse. Though you were used to the finest foods, you didn’t turn up your nose at the bitterest berries on the thorniest bushes. You even ate bark from trees, as deer do in winter. Going over the Alps, you ate strange meat that some men would rather die than consume. And you went through all this—the comparison between then and now shames you—in such a soldier-like way that you didn’t seem to suffer at all."
’Tis pity of him.,It’s too bad.
"Let his shames quickly Did show ourselves i’ th’ field, and to that end Assemble we immediate council. Pompey Thrives in our idleness.",Let’s hope his sense of shame will send him back to Rome quickly. It’s time that we brought our armies into the field. Let’s call a council of war immediately. Pompey is making the most of our absence.
"Tomorrow, Caesar, I shall be furnished to inform you rightly To front this present time.","Tomorrow, Caesar, I’ll be able to tell you what land and sea forces I can raise for this war."
Till which encounter It is my business too. Farewell.,I’ll be getting my own figures together in the meantime. Good-bye.
"Farewell, my lord. What you shall know meantime Of stirs abroad, I shall beseech you, sir,","Good-bye, my lord. If you receive any more news, please share it with me."
"Doubt not, sir. I knew it for my bond.","Don’t worry, that goes without saying."
Charmian!,Charmian!
Madam?,Madam?
"Ha, ha! Give me to drink mandragora.","Ah, give me some mandragora narcotic syrup mandragora to drink."
"Why, madam?","Why, madam?"
My Antony is away.,So I can sleep away the time while my Antony is gone.
You think of him too much.,You think about him too much.
"Oh, ’tis treason!",That’s treason!
"Madam, I trust, not so.","I hope not, Madam."
"Thou, eunuch Mardian!",Eunuch! Mardian!
What’s your highness’ pleasure?,What can I do for your highness?
"In aught an eunuch has. ’Tis well for thee That, being unseminared, thy freer thoughts May not fly forth of Egypt. Hast thou affections?","I don’t want to hear you sing. I’m not interested in anything a eunuch can do. It’s a good thing for you that, being castrated, you can better concentrate on my needs. Do you have desires?"
"Yes, gracious madam.","Yes, dear madam."
Indeed?,Indeed?
"Not in deed, madam, for I can do nothing But what indeed is honest to be done. Yet have I fierce affections, and think What Venus did with Mars.","Well, not in deed, madam, since I can’t do anything unchaste. But I do have intense passions—and I do think about what Venus did with Mars Venus, goddess of love, and Mars, god of war, were legendary lovers. what Venus did with Mars ."
"O Charmian, Or does he walk? Or is he on his horse? O happy horse, to bear the weight of Antony! Do bravely, horse, for wott’st thou whom thou mov’st? The demi-Atlas of this earth, the arm Or murmuring “Where’s my serpent of old Nile?” For so he calls me. Now I feed myself With most delicious poison. Think on me, That am with Phoebus’ amorous pinches black When thou wast here above the ground, I was A morsel for a monarch. And great Pompey Would stand and make his eyes grow in my brow. There would he anchor his aspect, and die","Oh, Charmian, where do you think he is now? Is he standing or sitting? Or is he walking? Or is he on his horse? Oh, how fortunate that horse is to have Antony on him. Do well, horse. Do you know whom it is you carry? A man who carries responsibility for a third of the world on his shoulders. He’s speaking now, or perhaps he’s whispering, “Where’s my serpent of the Nile?” For that’s his pet name for me. I’m killing myself with this provocative speculation . . . Are you thinking about me? Even though I’ve been darkened by the sun and wrinkled with age? Caesar, with your broad forehead, when you were alive, I was the perfect young consort for a king. And powerful Pompey used to stare at me as if he were frozen in time. Referring to two previous lovers, Julius Caesar and Gneius Pompey (son of Pompey the Great and elder brother of Sextus Pompeius). I was the perfect young consort for a king. And powerful Pompey used to stare at me as if he were frozen in time."
"Sovereign of Egypt, hail!","Queen of Egypt, greetings!"
"How much unlike art thou Mark Antony! Yet, coming from him, that great med’cine hath With his tinct gilded thee.","You are nothing like Mark Antony! But since you come from him, you’re saturated with his healing spirit. How does it go with my magnificent Mark Antony?"
"Last thing he did, dear Queen, He kissed—the last of many doubled kisses— This orient pearl.","The last thing he did before sending me off, dear Queen, was to kiss—the last of many such kisses—this Indian pearl for you."
His speech sticks in my heart.,His speech is stored in my heart.
Mine ear must pluck it thence.,My ear must pull it out.
"“Good friend,” quoth he, This treasure of an oyster, at whose foot, To mend the petty present, I will piece Her opulent throne with kingdoms. All the East, Say thou, shall call her mistress.” So he nodded, Who neighed so high that what I would have spoke Was beastly dumbed by him.","“Good friend,” he said, “say that the faithful Roman sends an oyster’s treasure to the great Queen of Egypt, and that he plans to enhance this meager gift by adding new kingdoms to her empire. Tell her that the entire East shall call her Queen.” Then he nodded and solemnly mounted an armored warhorse, which neighed so loudly it effectively silenced anything I might have said in reply."
"What was he, sad or merry?",Was he sad or happy?
Like to the time o’ th’ year between the extremes,He was like that time of year halfway between the extremes of hot and cold: he was neither sad nor happy.
"O well-divided disposition! Note him, Note him, good Charmian, ’tis the man, but note him. He was not sad, for he would shine on those That make their looks by his. He was not merry, In Egypt with his joy, but between both. O heavenly mingle! Be’st thou sad or merry, The violence of either thee becomes, So does it no man else.—Mett’st thou my posts?","Oh, what an even disposition he has! Observe, observe good Charmian! That’s exactly how he is! Just notice. He wasn’t sad, because he knows that his disposition affects others. He wasn’t merry, because to be merry would indicate that he had forgotten his love in Egypt. He was somewhere in the middle, between them . . . Oh, heavenly mixture! Whether you are sad or merry, the intensity of either suits you like no one else . . . Did you meet my messengers on your way here?"
Why do you send so thick?,"Yes, madam, twenty different messengers. Why did you send so many?"
"Who’s born that day When I forget to send to Antony Shall die a beggar. Ink and paper, Charmian. Welcome, my good Alexas. Did I, Charmian,","Whoever is born on a day I forget to send a message to Antony will die a beggar. Bring ink and paper, Charmian. Welcome, my good Alexas. Charmian, did I ever love Caesar as much as this?"
"Oh, that brave Caesar!","Oh, that splendid Caesar!"
"Be choked with such another emphasis! Say, “the brave Antony.”","May you choke on any other sentiments like that! Say, “That splendid Antony.”"
The valiant Caesar!,The courageous Caesar!
"By Isis, I will give thee bloody teeth If thou with Caesar paragon again","By Isis, I’ll give you bloody teeth if you ever compare Caesar with Antony, my best man among men."
"By your most gracious pardon, I sing but after you.","Pardon me, but I’m just repeating what you yourself have said."
"My salad days, When I was green in judgment, cold in blood, To say as I said then. (to everyone) But, come, away. (to CHARMIAN ) Get me ink and paper. Or I’ll unpeople Egypt.",That was when I was young and inexperienced and didn’t know what passion was. (to everyone) But come. (to CHARMIAN ) Go get me ink and paper. He shall have different messages every day if I have to depopulate Egypt to send them.
"If the great gods be just, they shall assist The deeds of justest men.","If the great gods are just, they will help the most honest men."
"Know, worthy Pompey, That what they do delay, they not deny.","You should know, noble Pompey, that although the gods may delay action, that doesn’t mean they will necessarily refuse their help."
"Whiles we are suitors to their throne, decays","But while we pray and wait for that help, the cause we petition for may be lost."
"We, ignorant of ourselves, Beg often our own harms, which the wise powers Deny us for our good, so find we profit By losing of our prayers.","Sometimes we don’t know what’s best for us and ask for things that may harm us. In that case, the wise gods deny our prayers for our own good."
"I shall do well. The people love me, and the sea is mine. Says it will come to th’ full. Mark Antony In Egypt sits at dinner, and will make No wars without doors. Caesar gets money where He loses hearts. Lepidus flatters both, Nor either cares for him.","I’ll do well. The people are on my side, and I’m in charge of the sea. My forces are growing, and everything I know tells me it’s all coming together. Mark Antony is at dinner in Egypt and won’t be going outside to make war. Caesar loses supporters wherever he raises money. Lepidus flatters both of them, as they flatter him, but he doesn’t love them, and they don’t love him."
Caesar and Lepidus Are in the field. A mighty strength they carry.,Caesar and Lepidus are organizing their military operation. They have a massive army.
Where have you this? ’Tis false.,Where did you hear this? It’s not true.
"From Silvius, sir.","From Silvius, sir."
"He dreams. I know they are in Rome together Salt Cleopatra, soften thy wanned lip! Let witchcraft join with beauty, lust with both. Tie up the libertine in a field of feasts, Keep his brain fuming. Epicurean cooks, That sleep and feeding may prorogue his honor Even till a Lethe’d dulness—","He’s dreaming. I know they’re in Rome together, hoping for Antony to return. Lecherous Cleopatra, may all the charms of love soften those withered lips! Join your witchcraft with your beauty, and let Antony’s lust combine with both. Keep this libertine occupied with endless debauchery. Keep his brain drunk and his appetite unsatisfied, so that sleeping and eating make him drowsy and forgetful of his duties, like the Lethe mythical river of the underworld; to drink from it brought forgetfulness Lethe does."
"How now, Varrius?","What’s the news, Varrius?"
This is most certain that I shall deliver: Mark Antony is every hour in Rome A space for farther travel.,"This news is absolutely true: Mark Antony is expected to arrive in Rome at any hour now. In the time since he left Egypt, he could have traveled an even longer distance."
"I could have given less matter A better ear.—Menas, I did not think This amorous surfeiter would have donned his helm Is twice the other twain. But let us rear The higher our opinion, that our stirring Can from the lap of Egypt’s widow pluck The ne’er lust-wearied Antony.","I would have listened to less important news with greater enthusiasm. Menas, I had no idea this amorous glutton would have put on his helmet for such an insignificant war. His military ability is double that of the other two. We must form a better opinion of ourselves if our uprising can pull the insatiable Antony’s attention away from that Egyptian widow."
"I cannot hope His wife that’s dead did trespasses to Caesar. His brother warred upon him, although, I think, Not moved by Antony.","I don’t expect Caesar and Antony will have a very friendly reunion. Antony’s dead wife raised an army against him, as did his brother, though I don’t think Antony instigated it."
"I know not, Menas, How lesser enmities may give way to greater. ’Twere pregnant they should square between themselves, For they have entertainèd cause enough To draw their swords. But how the fear of us May cement their divisions and bind up Be ’t as our gods will have ’t. It only stands Our lives upon to use our strongest hands. Come, Menas.","Menas, I don’t understand how minor quarrels can be superseded by greater ones. If it weren’t for the fact that we oppose all three of them together, they’d be fighting each other. They certainly have enough provocation. But it’s possible the fear of us may mend their petty differences, though how that will work out, we cannot say. It will be as the gods see fit. In any case, our survival depends on putting together the strongest force possible. Let’s go, Menas."
"Good Enobarbus, ’tis a worthy deed, And shall become you well, to entreat your captain To soft and gentle speech.","Good Enobarbus, you would be doing a very good thing if you advised your captain to speak calmly and quietly."
"I shall entreat him To answer like himself. If Caesar move him, And speak as loud as Mars. By Jupiter, Were I the wearer of Antonio’s beard, I would not shave ’t today.","I will advise him to speak as he usually does. If Caesar makes him mad, let Antony stand tall and speak as loudly as Mars, the god of war. By Jupiter, if I were Antony, I wouldn’t shave my beard today. I’d leave it long and dare Caesar to insult me by pulling on it, just so I could fight him."
’Tis not a time for private stomaching.,This is not the time for dwelling on personal grievances.
Every time serves for the matter that is then born in ’t.,It’s always appropriate to deal with matters as they arise.
But small to greater matters must give way.,But major issues must come before minor ones.
Not if the small come first.,Not if the minor ones come up first.
Your speech is passion. But pray you stir No embers up. Here comes the noble Antony.,"You speak out of passion, but I beg you not to stir things up. Here comes the noble Antony."
"And yonder, Caesar.",And there comes Caesar.
"(to VENTIDIUS ) If we compose well here, to Parthia. Hark, Ventidius.","(to VENTIDIUS ) If we can come to an agreement here, we’ll move on to Parthia. Listen, Ventidius."
"(to MECAENAS ) I do not know, Maecenas. Ask Agrippa.","(to MAECENAS ) I don’t know, Maecenas. Ask Agrippa."
"(to CAESAR and ANTONY ) Noble friends, A leaner action rend us. What’s amiss, May it be gently heard. When we debate Our trivial difference loud, we do commit Murder in healing wounds. Then, noble partners, Touch you the sourest points with sweetest terms, Nor curstness grow to th’ matter.","(to CAESAR and ANTONY ) Good friends, the cause that joined us was noble. Don’t let some petty quarrel tear us apart. Let’s discuss this calmly. When we argue our differences with raised voices, we do more harm than good. So I plead with you to use reasonable words as you discuss these unreasonable deeds, and don’t lose your tempers."
"’Tis spoken well. Were we before our armies, and to fight, I should do thus.","You’re right. If we were in front of our armies, about to fight, I would do this."
Welcome to Rome.,Welcome to Rome.
Thank you.,Thank you.
Sit.,Have a seat.
"Sit, sir.",After you.
"Nay, then.","No, after you."
"Or being, concern you not.","I hear you’ve interpreted some of my actions as being improper, when they weren’t improper at all—or if they were, their impropriety didn’t concern you."
"I must be laughed at If or for nothing or a little, I Should say myself offended, and with you Chiefly i’ th’ world; more laughed at, that I should It not concerned me.","I should be ridiculed if I were offended so easily—and laughed at even more for speaking of you disrespectfully, when I had no reason to speak of you at all."
"My being in Egypt, Caesar, what was ’t to you?","Caesar, what did my stay in Egypt have to do with you?"
No more than my residing here at Rome Might be to you in Egypt. Yet if you there Might be my question.,"No more than my staying here in Rome might mean to you in Egypt. But if you conspired against my position while you were there, I might be interested in the reason for your stay in Egypt."
"How intend you, “practiced”?","How do you mean, “conspired”?"
"You may be pleased to catch at mine intent By what did here befall me. Your wife and brother Made wars upon me, and their contestation","You can judge for yourself what I mean. Your wife and brother led troops against me, claiming to be fighting in your name. They said they were acting for you."
"You do mistake your business. My brother never Did urge me in his act. I did inquire it, And have my learning from some true reports That drew their swords with you. Did he not rather And make the wars alike against my stomach, Having alike your cause? Of this my letters Before did satisfy you. If you’ll patch a quarrel, As matter whole you have to make it with,","You’re mistaken. My brother didn’t use my name to justify his rebellion. I talked to some reliable participants in that battle. On the contrary, his fight was with both of us. He rejected my authority as much as yours. Since you and I share a common cause, wouldn’t his actions against you be hostile to me as well? I’ve already sent the proof in my letters. If you want to pick a fight, you’ll have to find a more substantial excuse."
"You praise yourself By laying defects of judgment to me, but You patched up your excuses.","You defend yourself by blaming my judgment, but you’re just making up feeble excuses."
"Not so, not so. I know you could not lack, I am certain on ’t, Very necessity of this thought, that I, Could not with graceful eyes attend those wars Which fronted mine own peace. As for my wife, I would you had her spirit in such another. The third o’ th’ world is yours, which with a snaffle","Not true, not true. You know I would never approve a war against my own cause. As for my wife, if only you had such a wife. It’s easier to rule a third of the world than a wife like that."
"Would we had all such wives, that the men might go to wars with the women!",We should all have wives like that. Then the women could go to war with the men.
"So much uncurbable, her garboils, Caesar, Made out of her impatience—which not wanted Did you too much disquiet. For that you must But say I could not help it.","I had no control over her uprisings, Caesar, which arose from her impatience—and were shrewdly undertaken, as well. I’m sorry she caused you so much trouble. But you can’t blame me for her offenses."
I wrote to you When rioting in Alexandria. You Did pocket up my letters and with taunts,I sent you a letter while you were carousing in Alexandria. You put my letters in your pocket without reading them and then mocked my messenger out of the room.
"Sir, He fell upon me ere admitted, then. Three kings I had newly feasted, and did want Of what I was i’ th’ morning. But next day I told him of myself, which was as much Be nothing of our strife. If we contend, Out of our question wipe him.","Sir, he burst into the room without invitation, just after I had come from an important banquet with three kings. I was not myself, as a result of the wine. The next day I explained all this to him, which was as good as begging his pardon. Let’s not fight over this fellow. If we must argue, let us remove him from our arguments."
"You have broken The article of your oath, which you shall never Have tongue to charge me with.",You’ve broken the terms of our sworn agreement. You will never be able to say the same about me.
"Soft, Caesar.","Easy, Caesar."
"No, Lepidus, let him speak. The honor is sacred which he talks on now, Supposing that I lacked it.—But, on, Caesar. The article of my oath?","No, Lepidus, let him say what’s on his mind. Now he slanders my honor, which is sacred to me. Go on, Caesar. What part of the agreement did I break?"
The which you both denied.,You agreed to send me troops and weapons when I needed them. You refused me both.
"Neglected, rather, And then when poisoned hours had bound me up From mine own knowledge. As nearly as I may I’ll play the penitent to you, but mine honesty Work without it. Truth is that Fulvia, To have me out of Egypt, made wars here, For which myself, the ignorant motive, do So far ask pardon as befits mine honor","I overlooked your request, but I did not deny it. Your request came at a time when the poisonous effects of reveling caused me to be unaware of my own actions. I will apologize as much as is appropriate, but my apology will not diminish my great stature—or if I am denied that honor, I will withhold my military might. The truth is that to get me out of Egypt, Fulvia provoked riots here. And though I am only indirectly the cause of all this trouble, I ask your pardon to the extent that my honor permits me to lower myself in such a situation."
’Tis noble spoken.,Spoken like a gentleman.
"If it might please you to enforce no further The griefs between ye, to forget them quite Were to remember that the present need Speaks to atone you.","If it’s okay with you, you should not press your grievances any further, but realize that the current situation should be enough to reconcile you."
"Worthily spoken, Maecenas.","Well put, Maecenas."
"Or, if you borrow one another’s love for the instant, you may, when you hear no more words of Pompey, return it again. You shall have time to wrangle in when you have nothing else to do.",Or you can pretend to settle your differences until this matter with Pompey is finished. You can argue as much as you like when there’s nothing else to do.
Thou art a soldier only. Speak no more.,You are only a soldier. Be quiet.
That truth should be silent I had almost forgot.,"Oh, I’d forgotten that no one’s supposed to speak the truth."
You wrong this presence. Therefore speak no more.,It’s not appropriate for a soldier to be part of a discussion among noblemen. Don’t speak any further.
"Go to, then. Your considerate stone.","As you please. I’ll pretend to be a conscious stone, and think without speaking."
"I do not much dislike the matter, but The manner of his speech, for ’t cannot be So diff’ring in their acts. Yet if I knew What hoop should hold us stanch, from edge to edge O’ th’ world I would pursue it.","I agree with what he says, though I don’t care for the way he says it. It’s not possible for us to be friends anymore. We’re too different, in both our dispositions and actions. But if there were something that could join us together again, I would go to the ends of the world to find it."
"Give me leave, Caesar.","May I speak, Caesar."
"Speak, Agrippa.","What is it, Agrippa?"
"Thou hast a sister by the mother’s side, Admired Octavia. Great Mark Antony Is now a widower.","You have a beautiful half-sister, Octavia. Great Mark Antony is a widower now."
"Say not so, Agrippa. If Cleopatra heard you, your reproof","You’d better not make that suggestion, Agrippa. If Cleopatra heard you, you would be well punished for your audacity."
"I am not married, Caesar. Let me hear Agrippa further speak.","It’s true I’m not married, Caesar. Let me hear what Agrippa has to say."
"To hold you in perpetual amity, To make you brothers, and to knit your hearts Octavia to his wife, whose beauty claims No worse a husband than the best of men, Whose virtue and whose general graces speak That which none else can utter. By this marriage, And all great fears, which now import their dangers, Would then be nothing. Truths would be tales, Where now half-tales be truths. Her love to both Would each to other and all loves to both For ’tis a studied, not a present thought, By duty ruminated.","If Antony were to take Octavia as his wife, you two would be bound in eternal friendship. As brothers, your hearts would be tied together in an unbreakable knot. She is beautiful enough for the best of men. Her virtue and grace are unparalleled. With this marriage, all the petty jealousies that now seem huge, and all the great fears that are dangerous in themselves, would disappear. People would become used to speaking the truth rather than gossip. Since she would love both of you, you two would be joined in that love. Excuse my bluntness. This is not a spur-of-the-moment suggestion. I have been considering this for some time, in my duties to both of you."
Will Caesar speak?,"What do you say, Caesar?"
Not till he hears how Antony is touched With what is spoke already.,I’d rather hear your reaction to this first.
"If I would say, “Agrippa, be it so,” To make this good?","If I said to Agrippa, “I agree. Make it happen,” does Agrippa have the power to make it so?"
"The power of Caesar, and His power unto Octavia.",He has both my power and my influence over Octavia.
"May I never To this good purpose, that so fairly shows, Further this act of grace, and from this hour The heart of brothers govern in our loves And sway our great designs!","I wouldn’t dream of opposing such an obviously promising idea. Let’s shake on it. If you go through with this plan, from now on we’ll be brothers, and our love for one another will guide our actions."
There’s my hand.,Here’s my hand.
"A sister I bequeath you whom no brother To join our kingdoms and our hearts, and never Fly off our loves again!",I give you a sister whom I love more than a brother ever loved any sister. She will be the bond that joins our kingdoms and our hearts. We’ll never fight again.
"Happily, amen!",I’m happy to say “amen” to that!
"I did not think to draw my sword ’gainst Pompey, For he hath laid strange courtesies and great Lest my remembrance suffer ill report; At heel of that, defy him.","I didn’t think I would ever fight Pompey. He’s shown me unusual deference lately, and I must repay his favors or risk a reputation for ingratitude. That done, I can turn against him."
"Time calls upon ’s. Of us must Pompey presently be sought, Or else he seeks out us.",There isn’t much time. Either we go after Pompey or he’ll come after us.
Where lies he?,Where is he now?
About the Mount Misena.,Near Mt. Misena Hilly port town south of Rome Mt. Misena .
What is his strength by land?,How large is his land army?
Great and increasing. But by sea he is an absolute master.,Large and increasing. But his navy rules the sea.
"Would we had spoke together! Haste we for it. Yet, ere we put ourselves in arms, dispatch we The business we have talked of.","That’s what I hear. I wish we’d had this conversation sooner. Let’s get down to business—and yet, before we get ready for war, let’s take care of that business we just discussed."
"With most gladness, And do invite you to my sister’s view,",With pleasure. I’ll introduce you to my sister. Follow me.
"Let us, Lepidus, not lack your company.","Come with us, Lepidus."
"Noble Antony, not sickness should detain me.","Noble Antony, even illness couldn’t keep me away."
"(to ENOBARBUS ) Welcome from Egypt, sir.","(to ENOBARBUS ) Welcome back from Egypt, sir."
"Half the heart of Caesar, worthy Maecenas! My honorable friend, Agrippa.","You’ve become Caesar’s right hand man, Maecenas! It’s good to see you too, Agrippa."
Good Enobarbus!,Good Enobarbus!
We have cause to be glad that matters are so well digested. You stayed well by ’t in Egypt.,We can be happy that things have been resolved so agreeably. And I see you survived your time in Egypt.
"Ay, sir, we did sleep day out of countenance and made the night light with drinking.","Yes, sir, it was tough. We confused the daytime by sleeping through it, and made the night merry with our drinking."
Eight wild boars roasted whole at a breakfast—and but twelve persons there! Is this true?,We heard that once you were served eight wild boars roasted whole for breakfast—for only twelve people! Is that true?
"This was but as a fly by an eagle. We had much more monstrous matter of feast, which worthily deserved noting.",That was nothing. There were many even more memorable feasts.
"She’s a most triumphant lady, if report be square to her.","She’s a remarkable lady, if the rumors are to be believed."
"When she first met Mark Antony, she pursed up his heart upon the river of Cydnus.","From the first time Antony saw her, sailing on her barge on the Cydnus River River in southern Turkey. Cydnus River , he was hers."
"There she appeared indeed, or my reporter devised well for her.","She made quite an appearance there, or else my informant invented a very flattering description of her."
"I will tell you. The barge she sat in, like a burnished throne, Burned on the water. The poop was beaten gold, Purple the sails, and so perfumèd that Which to the tune of flutes kept stroke, and made The water which they beat to follow faster, As amorous of their strokes. For her own person, It beggared all description: she did lie O’erpicturing that Venus where we see The fancy outwork nature. On each side her Stood pretty dimpled boys, like smiling Cupids, With divers-colored fans, whose wind did seem And what they undid did.","I’ll tell you. Her barge looked like a golden throne upon the waves, burning bright with the sun’s reflections. The rear deck was covered with hammered gold. The sails were dyed purple, and they were perfumed so heavily that they made the air seem dizzy with love. The oars were made of silver, and the oarsmen rowed in time to flute music. As the oars beat the water, the waves seemed to speed up as if excited by lust. Cleopatra’s appearance was indescribable. As she reclined under a canopy woven from gold thread, she was more beautiful than any artist’s idealized portrait of the goddess Venus. Pretty, Cupid-like boys stood on either side of her, smiling and cooling her with multicolored fans, which seemed to fan the flames in her cheeks even as they cooled them, undoing what they did."
"Oh, rare for Antony!",How excellent for Antony!
"Her gentlewomen, like the Nereides, So many mermaids, tended her i’ th’ eyes, And made their bends adornings. At the helm Swell with the touches of those flower-soft hands That yarely frame the office. From the barge A strange invisible perfume hits the sense Of the adjacent wharfs. The city cast Enthroned i’ th’ marketplace, did sit alone, Whistling to th’ air, which, but for vacancy, Had gone to gaze on Cleopatra too And made a gap in nature.","Her ladies-in-waiting—like Nereides sea nymphs Nereides , or mermaids—tended to Cleopatra as she watched them, and their graceful movements added to the beauty of the scene. It seemed as if a mermaid were steering. The silken sails and ropes swelled in the wind, expertly handled by the ladies’ soft hands. People on the wharves could smell exotic perfume wafting from the barge as it passed them. All the people came out to see her, and Antony, waiting for her in the marketplace, was left alone. Even the air itself would have gone to look at Cleopatra, if that wouldn’t have caused an unnatural vacuum in the atmosphere."
Rare Egyptian!,Extraordinary Egyptian!
"Invited her to supper. She replied It should be better he became her guest, Which she entreated. Our courteous Antony, Whom ne’er the word of “No” woman heard speak, And for his ordinary pays his heart For what his eyes eat only.","When she landed at the port, Antony sent an invitation for her to come to supper. She replied by saying that it would be better for him to be her guest instead. Our courteous Antony, who has never said “no” to any woman, after spending plenty of time being groomed by the barber, goes to the feast. For that simple meal, he paid with his heart—even though it was only his eyes that were satisfied."
"Royal wench! She made great Caesar lay his sword to bed. He plowed her, and she cropped.","Royal seductress! She lured Julius Caesar into her bed, he made love to her, and she bore his child Their son, Caesarion his child ."
"I saw her once And having lost her breath, she spoke, and panted, That she did make defect perfection, And, breathless, pour breathe forth.","I saw her once hop forty feet down the street. When she stopped she was so out of breath that she was panting. Her beauty made even that weakness seem perfect, and even in her breathlessness she seemed to pour out breath."
Now Antony must leave her utterly.,Now Antony has to leave her completely.
"Age cannot wither her, nor custom stale Her infinite variety. Other women cloy The appetites they feed, but she makes hungry Where most she satisfies, for vilest things Bless her when she is riggish.","He’ll never leave her. Age won’t wither her, and her charms are so varied that she never grows boring. With other women, the more familiar you grow with them the less appealing they become. Cleopatra, on the other hand, makes you desire her the more you see her. Even her worst faults are charming, and holy priests bless her even when she acts the slut."
"If beauty, wisdom, modesty, can settle The heart of Antony, Octavia is A blessèd lottery to him.","If beauty, wisdom, and modesty can settle Antony’s restless heart, Octavia will be the best thing that has ever happened to him."
Let us go. Whilst you abide here.,"Let’s go. Good Enobarbus, consider yourself my guest as long as you’re here."
"Humbly, sir, I thank you.",I humbly thank you.
(to OCTAVIA ) The world and my great office will sometimes Divide me from your bosom.,(to OCTAVIA ) There will be times when my duties and responsibilities take me away from you.
All which time Before the gods my knee shall bow my prayers To them for you.,"And I will spend our time apart on my knees, praying for you."
"(to CAESAR )     Good night, sir.—My Octavia, I have not kept my square, but that to come Shall all be done by th’ rule. Good night, dear lady. (to CAESAR ) Good night, sir.","(to CAESAR ) Good night, sir. My Octavia, don’t believe everything you hear about me. I haven’t always lived a conventional life, but the future will be by the book. Good night, dear lady. (to CAESAR ) Good night, sir."
Good night.,Good night.
"Now, sirrah, you do wish yourself in Egypt?","Now, sirrah term of address for a person of lower status sirrah , I hear you wish you were back in Egypt."
"Would I had never come from thence, nor you thither.",I wish I had never left Egypt and that you had never come to Egypt.
"If you can, your reason?","Tell me why, if you can."
"I see it in my motion, have it not in my tongue. But yet hie you to Egypt again.","It’s a feeling, but nothing I can put into words. But you had better get back to Egypt again."
Caesar’s or mine?,"Tell me who shall have the better luck, Caesar or me?"
"Caesar’s. Therefore, O Antony, stay not by his side. Thy dæmon—that thy spirit which keeps thee—is Where Caesar’s is not. But near him thy angel Becomes afeard, as being o’erpowered. Therefore Make space enough between you.","Caesar. So you’d better not stay with him, Antony. Your guardian angel is noble, courageous, significant, and unmatched when Caesar’s not around. But when you are with him, your angel is weakened and easily frightened. That’s why there must be space between you."
Speak this no more.,Don’t speak of this again.
"To none but thee, no more but when to thee. Thou art sure to lose, and of that natural luck He beats thee ’gainst the odds. Thy luster thickens When he shines by. I say again, thy spirit Is all afraid to govern thee near him,","To none but you, only to you. You will surely lose any game you play with Caesar. With his natural luck, he will beat you even against the odds. Your light dulls when he is near. I repeat: your angel is afraid to inspire you when you’re around him, but when he goes away it becomes brilliant again."
Get thee gone. Say to Ventidius I would speak with him.,Leave now. Tell Ventidius I want to speak with him.
"(to himself) He shall to Parthia. Be it art or hap, He hath spoken true. The very dice obey him, And in our sports my better cunning faints His cocks do win the battle still of mine When it is all to naught, and his quails ever Beat mine, inhooped, at odds. I will to Egypt. And though I make this marriage for my peace,","(to himself) I’ll send him to Parthia. Whether he’s truly gifted or just lucky, what the Fortuneteller said is true. Even the dice obey Caesar. When we compete in sports, my skill is defeated by his luck. If we pick numbers in a lottery, he wins. His roosters always beat mine at the cockfights. His quails beat mine, even against the odds, when mine have the advantage. I’ll return to Egypt. Though I’ve made this marriage to keep peace with Caesar, my pleasure remains in the East, with Cleopatra."
"O come, Ventidius. You must to Parthia. Your commission’s ready. Follow me and receive ’t.","Come here, Ventidius. You must go to Parthia. Your authorization is ready. Come with me and I’ll get it for you."
"Trouble yourselves no further. Pray you, hasten Your generals after.",Don’t spend any more time here. Go tell your generals to hurry their preparations.
"Sir, Mark Antony Will e’en but kiss Octavia, and we’ll follow.","Sir, we’ll follow as soon as Mark Antony kisses Octavia good-bye."
"Till I shall see you in your soldiers’ dress,","Good-bye then, until the time I see you dressed in your battle gear, which will suit you both very well."
"We shall, As I conceive the journey, be at the Mount Before you, Lepidus.","According to my reckoning, we’ll get to Mt. Misena before you, Lepidus."
Your way is shorter. My purposes do draw me much about. You’ll win two days upon me.,You’re taking a shorter route. My plans take me a roundabout way. You’ll get there two days before me.
"Sir, good success.","Good luck, sir."
Farewell.,Farewell.
"Give me some music. Music, moody food Of us that trade in love.",Play me some music. Music feeds the melancholy moods of us lovers.
"The music, ho!","Musicians, come in!"
"Let it alone. Let’s to billiards. Come, Charmian.","Never mind. Let’s play billiards. Play with me, Charmian."
My arm is sore. Best play with Mardian.,My arm is sore. You’ll have a better game with Mardian.
"As with a woman.—Come, you’ll play with me, sir?","Playing with a eunuch is the same as playing with a woman. Will you play with me, sir?"
"As well as I can, madam.","I’ll do my best, madam."
"And when good will is showed, though ’t come too short, The actor may plead pardon. I’ll none now. My music playing far off, I will betray Tawny-finned fishes. My bended hook shall pierce Their slimy jaws, and as I draw them up I’ll think them every one an Antony","When a person tries in good faith, even if he fails he cannot be blamed. I don’t want to play now. Give me my fishing rod. We’ll go to the river. With my music playing in the background, I’ll lure fish. My hook will go through their slimy jaws and as I pull them up I’ll imagine each one is Antony. I’ll say, “Aha! I caught you!”"
"’Twas merry when You wagered on your angling, when your diver Did hang a salt fish on his hook, which he With fervency drew up.",It was funny when you and Antony bet on who could catch the first fish. You had a diver put a salted fish on his hook. He was so excited as he hurried to pull it in!
"That time—Oh, times!— I laughed him out of patience, and that night Ere the ninth hour, I drunk him to his bed, Then put my tires and mantles on him, whilst I wore his sword Philippan.","That time? Oh, there were so many fun times. I would play some trick on him and laugh until he lost his patience. Then, that night, I would laugh with him while we made love until he was patient again. Then by nine in the morning I would have him so drunk I could dress him in my clothes while I wore the sword he used at the famous battle of Philippi."
"Oh, from Italy! Ram thou thy fruitful tidings in mine ears,",Oh! News from Italy! Cram your good news into my ears. It’s been so long since I’ve heard from him.
"Madam, madam—","Madam, madam—"
"Antonio’s dead! If thou say so, villain, Thou kill’st thy mistress. But well and free, If thou so yield him, there is gold, and here My bluest veins to kiss—a hand that kings","Antony’s dead! If you say that, you bastard, you’ll kill your Queen. If you say he’s healthy and free, I’ll give you money and you may kiss my hand. Kings have trembled to kiss this hand."
"First, madam, he is well.","Let me say first, madam, that he is well."
"Why, there’s more gold. But, sirrah, mark, we use To say the dead are well. Bring it to that, The gold I give thee will I melt and pour","Well then, here’s more money for you. But you know, sirrah, we customarily say that the dead are well. If that’s what you mean, I’ll melt this gold and pour it down your throat that speaks these hateful words."
"Good madam, hear me.","Good madam, let me speak."
"Well, go to, I will. But there’s no goodness in thy face—if Antony Be free and healthful, so tart a favor Thou shouldst come like a Fury crowned with snakes, Not like a formal man.","All right, I will. But you don’t look as if you bring good news. If Antony is free and healthy, you shouldn’t wear such a sour face while bringing such good news. If he’s not well, you should arrive like a Fury The Furies were mythological figures who punished those who broke either natural or moral laws Fury with snakes for hair, not in the shape of a normal man."
Will ’t please you hear me?,Do you want to hear my news?
"I have a mind to strike thee ere thou speak’st. Yet if thou say Antony lives, is well, I’ll set thee in a shower of gold and hail Rich pearls upon thee.","I have half a mind to hit you before you speak again. But if Antony is alive, healthy, friendly with Caesar, and not Caesar’s prisoner, I’ll shower you with gold and pearls."
"Madam, he’s well.","Madam, he’s well."
Well said.,That’s well spoken.
And friends with Caesar.,And he’s friendly with Caesar.
Th’ art an honest man.,You are an honest man.
Caesar and he are greater friends than ever.,Caesar and he are better friends than ever.
Make thee a fortune from me.,I’m going to make you a rich man.
"But yet, madam—","But yet, madam—"
"I do not like “But yet.” It does allay The good precedence. Fie upon “But yet.” “But yet” is as a jailer to bring forth Some monstrous malefactor. Prithee, friend, The good and bad together. He’s friends with Caesar, In state of health, thou say’st, and, thou say’st, free.","I don’t like the sound of “but yet.” It reverses all the good that came before it. Damn those words, “but yet!” “But yet” is like a jailer about to bring out some horrible criminal. Please, my friend, give me all the news, both good and bad, at the same time. You say he’s friendly with Caesar, healthy, and free."
"Free, madam, no. I made no such report. He’s bound unto Octavia.","I didn’t say free, madam. No, I didn’t say that. He’s bound to Octavia."
For what good turn?,For what favor?
For the best turn i’ th’ bed.,For the favor of sleeping in her bed.
"I am pale, Charmian.","I’m sick, Charmian."
"Madam, he’s married to Octavia.","He’s married to Octavia, madam."
The most infectious pestilence upon thee!,May you die of the worst disease!
"Good madam, patience.","Good madam, be patient."
What say you?,What did you say to me?
Like balls before me! I’ll unhair thy head!,"Get out, you horrible bastard, or I’ll gouge out your eyes. I’ll scalp you."
"Thou shalt be whipped with wire and stewed in brine, Smarting in ling’ring pickle!","I’ll have you whipped with wire and soaked in brine like a pickle, making your pain linger."
"Gracious madam, I that do bring the news made not the match.","Gracious madam, I only brought the news. I didn’t make the match."
"And make thy fortunes proud. The blow thou hadst Shall make thy peace for moving me to rage, And I will boot thee with what gift beside Thy modesty can beg.","If you say it isn’t true, I’ll give you a province and make you rich. The blows I gave you already will make up for your upsetting me. And on top of that I’ll give you whatever you ask for."
"He’s married, madam.","He’s married, madam."
"Rogue, thou hast lived too long.","Rogue, you’ve lived too long!"
"Nay then, I’ll run. What mean you, madam? I have made no fault.","No way, then, I’ll run. What’s the matter with you, madam? I haven’t done anything to you."
"Good madam, keep yourself within yourself. The man is innocent.","Good madam, restrain yourself. The man hasn’t done anything wrong."
"Some innocents ’scape not the thunderbolt. Turn all to serpents. Call the slave again. Though I am mad, I will not bite him. Call!","Even innocents cannot always escape disaster. May Egypt drown in the Nile and all good creatures turn into poisonous snakes. Call that servant back. Even though I’m mad, I won’t bite him. Call him!"
He is afeard to come.,He’s afraid to come in.
I will not hurt him. These hands do lack nobility that they strike Have given myself the cause.,"I won’t hurt him. My hands are tainted if they hit an inferior, especially since I myself am the cause of my own distress."
"Come hither, sir. Though it be honest, it is never good To bring bad news. Give to a gracious message An host of tongues, but let ill tidings tell","Come here, sir. It may be honest, but it’s never wise to bring bad news. You can give good news in many ways, but let bad news interpret itself as you tell it."
I have done my duty.,I’ve only done my duty.
Is he married? I cannot hate thee worser than I do If thou again say “yes.”,Is he married? I can’t hate you any more than I already do if you repeat that he is.
"He’s married, madam.","He’s married, madam."
The gods confound thee! Dost thou hold there still?,May the gods destroy you! Do you maintain the same story?
"Should I lie, madam?","Do you want me to lie, madam?"
"Oh, I would thou didst, So half my Egypt were submerged and made A cistern for scaled snakes! Go, get thee hence. Hadst thou Narcissus in thy face, to me","Oh, I wish you had lied, even if it meant half my kingdom would be submerged and filled with snakes. Go, get out! Even if you were as handsome as Narcissus mythical boy who was so beautiful that he drowned himself while trying to embrace his own reflection Narcissus , your face would be ugly to me. Is he really married?"
I crave your highness’ pardon.,I beg your highness’ pardon.
He is married?,Is he really married?
Take no offense that I would not offend you. To punish me for what you make me do Seems much unequal. He’s married to Octavia.,Please don’t be offended that I don’t want to offend you any more. It’s not fair to punish me for something you make me do. He’s married to Octavia.
That art not what th’ art sure of! Get thee hence. The merchandise which thou hast brought from Rome Are all too dear for me. Lie they upon thy hand And be undone by ’em!,It’s too bad that Antony’s fault should make you look like a jerk. You didn’t have anything to do with it. Go away. The merchandise you bring from Rome is too expensive for me. Let it stay in your inventory until it bankrupts you.
"Good your highness, patience.","Be patient, your highness."
"In praising Antony, I have dispraised Caesar.","When I have praised Antony, I’ve disparaged Caesar."
"Many times, madam.","Many times, madam."
"I am paid for ’t now. Lead me from hence. I faint. O Iras, Charmian! ’Tis no matter.— Go to the fellow, good Alexas. Bid him Her inclination. Let him not leave out The color of her hair. Bring me word quickly.","I’m being repaid for that now. Help me out of here. I feel faint. Oh, Iras, Charmian! It doesn’t matter. Good Alexas, go ask that fellow to describe Octavia. How old is she? What kind of disposition does she have? Don’t let him leave out the color of her hair. Bring me his answers quickly."
"Let him forever go!—Let him not, Charmian. Though he be painted one way like a Gorgon, Bring me word how tall she is. Pity me, Charmian, But do not speak to me. Lead me to my chamber.","Let Antony be purged from my life forever—but no, don’t let him, Charmian. Even though half of him is like a Gorgon The Gorgons were mythical monsters whose gaze turned humans to stone Gorgon , the other half is like Mars. (to MARDIAN ) Ask Alexas to also ask him how tall she is. Feel sorry for me, Charmian, but don’t talk to me. Help me get to my bedroom."
"Your hostages I have, so have you mine, And we shall talk before we fight.","I have your hostages and you have mine. Let’s talk before we fight. In order to conduct negotiations in safety, warring sides exchanged important persons and held the hostages until negotiations were complete. I have your hostages and you have mine. Let’s talk before we fight."
"Most meet That first we come to words, and therefore have we Our written purposes before us sent, If ’twill tie up thy discontented sword And carry back to Sicily much tall youth That else must perish here.","It’s proper that we speak first, which is why we sent our proposals ahead of us for your consideration. If you’ve had time to think over these points, let us know whether they will relieve your frustration. If yes, then a lot of brave young men can return to Sicily who would otherwise die here."
"To you all three, The senators alone of this great world, Wherefore my father should revengers want, Having a son and friends, since Julius Caesar, Who at Philippi the good Brutus ghosted, There saw you laboring for him. What was ’t Made the all-honored, honest Roman Brutus, With the armed rest, courtiers of beauteous freedom, To drench the Capitol, but that they would Have one man but a man? And that is it The angered ocean foams, with which I meant To scourge th’ ingratitude that despiteful Rome Cast on my noble father.","I address the three of you, the sole rulers of this world and the main arbiters of the gods’ will. I don’t know why my father’s death shouldn’t be avenged, since he has a son and friends to do it. You avenged Julius Caesar’s death at Philippi, where his ghost haunted his killer, Brutus. Why did Cassius conspire against Caesar? And why did the honorable, well-intentioned Brutus and the others, men devoted to the ideal of freedom, assassinate Caesar? They didn’t want one man to be king in Rome. And that’s why I’ve built my navy, which is so huge that the weight of the ships makes the sea foam with anger. I will punish Rome for her ingratitude toward my noble father."
Take your time.,Take your time.
"Thou canst not fear us, Pompey, with thy sails. How much we do o’ercount thee.","Pompey, you cannot frighten us with your navy. We’ll meet you at sea. You know that on land our army is far greater than yours."
"At land indeed Thou dost o’ercount me of my father’s house, But since the cuckoo builds not for himself, Remain in ’t as thou mayst.","Yes, on land you do outnumber me. Even more since you annexed my father’s house and lands. But since, like the cuckoo Cuckoo birds lay their eggs in other birds’ nests. like the cuckoo , you don’t build anything for yourself, live in those lands as long as you can."
Be pleased to tell us— The offers we have sent you.,"To get back to the matter at hand, what do you think of our proposal?"
There’s the point.,That’s the point.
"Which do not be entreated to, but weigh What it is worth embraced.","Don’t let us talk you into anything, but consider carefully the value of our offers."
"And what may follow, To try a larger fortune.","And consider the possible consequences of fighting against us, in the hopes of gaining a greater fortune."
"You have made me offer Rid all the sea of pirates, then, to send Measures of wheat to Rome. This ’greed upon To part with unhacked edges and bear back Our targes undinted.","You have offered me the lands of Sicily and Sardinia. In return, I must clear the sea of pirates and send tributes of wheat to Rome. If I agree to this, we may leave unharmed, with our shields undented."
That’s our offer.,That’s our offer.
"Know then To take this offer, but Mark Antony Put me to some impatience. (to ANTONY )—Though I lose The praise of it by telling, you must know, When Caesar and your brother were at blows, Her welcome friendly.","You should know that when I came here I was prepared to accept your offer. But Mark Antony made me somewhat angry. (to ANTONY ) Though it would be nobler to for me not to speak of this good act myself, you should know that when Caesar and your brother were fighting, your mother came to Sicily for refuge. I welcomed her gladly."
"(to POMPEY )        I have heard it, Pompey, And am well studied for a liberal thanks Which I do owe you.","(to POMPEY ) I heard what you did for her, Pompey, and want to give you the many thanks I owe you."
Let me have your hand.,Let me shake your hand.
"I did not think, sir, to have met you here.",I didn’t think I would see you here.
"That called me timelier than my purpose hither, For I have gained by ’t.","The East is very seductive. I have you to thank for my trip here; I wouldn’t have left Egypt otherwise, and I have benefited from it."
(to POMPEY )          Since I saw you last There’s a change upon you.,(to POMPEY ) You’ve changed since the last time I saw you.
"Well, I know not What counts harsh Fortune casts upon my face, To make my heart her vassal.","Well, I cannot tell how my difficult life has weathered my face, but I will never let those difficulties subdue my courage."
Well met here.,It’s good we had this meeting.
"I hope so, Lepidus. Thus we are agreed. I crave our composition may be written And sealed between us.","I hope it works out for the best, Lepidus. So we are in agreement. Please have the contract written up so we can all sign it."
That’s the next to do.,That’s the next thing on the agenda.
Draw lots who shall begin.,We’ll have celebration feasts for each other before we go our separate ways. Let’s draw lots to see who will host the first one.
"That will I, Pompey.","I’ll give the first one, Pompey."
"No, Antony, take the lot. But, first or last, Your fine Egyptian cookery shall have The fame. I have heard that Julius Caesar","No, Antony. Pick one of these lots. Whether your banquet is first or last, your Egyptian cooking will make it the best. I heard that Julius Caesar got fat from all the feasting there."
You have heard much.,You’ve heard a lot.
"I have fair meanings, sir.","I mean well, sir."
And fair words to them.,I’m sure you do.
Then so much have I heard.,I’ve heard a lot more. I heard that Apollodorus carried—
(interrupting POMPEY ) No more of that. He did so.,"(interrupting POMPEY ) That’s enough of that. Yes, it’s true."
"What, I pray you?","What did he carry, please?"
A certain queen to Caesar in a mattress.,"A certain queen to Caesar, rolled up in a mattress According to Plutarch, this is how Cleopatra managed to secretly tryst with Julius Caesar. rolled up in a mattress ."
"I know thee now. How far’st thou, soldier?","Now I know who you are. How are you, soldier?"
"Well, And well am like to do, for I perceive,","I’m well, and probably will be for a while, as I hear that four feasts are being prepared."
Let me shake thy hand. I never hated thee. I have seen thee fight When I have envied thy behavior.,Let me shake your hand. I’ve never been your enemy. I’ve seen you fight and envied your skill.
"Sir, I never loved you much, but I ha’ praised ye When you have well deserved ten times as much","Sir, I wouldn’t say I was your friend, but I’ve praised you when you deserved ten times more praise than I gave."
"Enjoy thy plainness. It nothing ill becomes thee.— Aboard my galley I invite you all. Will you lead, lords?","Enjoy your frankness; it suits you. I invite you all aboard my ship. After you, my lords?"
"Show ’s the way, sir.","Show us the way, sir."
Come.,Come with me.
"(aside) Thy father, Pompey, would ne’er have made this","(to himself) Your father would never have agreed to this treaty, Pompey. (to ENOBARBUS ) You and I have met, sir."
"At sea, I think.",I think it was at sea.
"We have, sir.","That it was, sir."
You have done well by water.,You’ve done well at sea.
And you by land.,And you’ve done well on land.
"I will praise any man that will praise me, though it cannot be denied what I have done by land.",I’ll flatter anyone who flatters me—though what I’ve accomplished on land cannot be denied.
Nor what I have done by water.,Neither can my accomplishments at sea.
"Yes, something you can deny for your own safety: you have been a great thief by sea.","Yes, for your own safety, you should deny one thing: you have been a great thief at sea."
And you by land.,As you were on land.
"There I deny my land service. But give me your hand, Menas.","That’s the one part of my service on land I do deny. But let’s shake hands, Menas."
"If our eyes had authority, here they might take two thieves kissing.","If our eyes were policemen, they might capture two thieves at once while we’re embracing."
"All men’s faces are true, whatsome’er their hands are.","Men’s faces are truthful, whatever their hands do."
But there is never a fair woman has a true face.,But no beautiful woman has an honest face.
No slander. They steal hearts.,That’s no lie. They steal hearts.
We came hither to fight with you.,We came here to fight against you.
"For my part, I am sorry it is turned to a drinking. Pompey doth this day laugh away his fortune.","For my part, I’m sorry this battle turned into a drinking match. Today Pompey laughs away his fortune."
"If he do, sure he cannot weep ’t back again.","If that’s true, he won’t get it back by crying."
"You’ve said, sir. We looked not for Mark Antony here. Pray you, is he married to Cleopatra?","That’s the truth, sir. We didn’t expect Mark Antony to be here. Is he married to Cleopatra?"
Caesar’s sister is called Octavia.,Caesar’s sister is named Octavia.
"True, sir. She was the wife of Caius Marcellus.","That’s true, sir. She was previously Caius Marcellus’ wife."
But she is now the wife of Marcus Antonius.,But she is now Mark Antony’s wife.
"Pray ye, sir?","Excuse me, sir?"
’Tis true.,It’s true.
Then is Caesar and he forever knit together.,Then Caesar and he will always be united.
"If I were bound to divine of this unity, I would not prophesy so.","If I were to make a prediction regarding this union, I wouldn’t say that."
I think the policy of that purpose made more in the marriage than the love of the parties.,I think the marriage was made more for political reasons than for love.
"I think so too. But you shall find the band that seems to tie their friendship together will be the very strangler of their amity. Octavia is of a holy, cold, and still conversation.","I think so too. But you’ll see that the very thing that joins them will be the thing that separates them. Octavia has a pious, chaste, meek disposition."
Who would not have his wife so?,Doesn’t everyone want a wife like that?
"Not he that himself is not so, which is Mark Antony. He will to his Egyptian dish again. Then shall the sighs of Octavia blow the fire up in Caesar, and, as I said before, that which is the strength of their amity shall prove the immediate author of their variance. Antony will use his affection where it is. He married but his occasion here.","Not someone who doesn’t share that disposition, meaning Mark Antony. He’ll go back to his Egyptian dish. Then Octavia’s complaints will rouse Caesar, and as I said before, the thing that brought them together will part them. Antony will go where his passion is. He only married out of political necessity."
"And thus it may be. Come, sir, will you aboard? I have a health for you.","Then that’s the way it may turn out. Come on, sir, will you come aboard? I want to drink your health."
"I shall take it, sir. We have used our throats in Egypt.","I’ll join you, sir. We did a lot of drinking in Egypt."
"Come, let’s away.",Let’s go.
"Here they’ll be, man. Some o’ their plants are ill-rooted already. The least wind i’ th’ world will blow them down.","Here’s where they’ll end up, on the floor. Some of them are leaning already. It won’t take much for them to fall over."
Lepidus is high-colored.,Lepidus is red in the face.
They have made him drink alms-drink.,They made him drink the leftover wine usually given to the poor.
"As they pinch one another by the disposition, he cries out, “No more,” reconciles them to his entreaty and himself to th’ drink.","Their various personalities grate on one another. Lepidus cries, “No more arguing!” and then when they agree he resigns himself to drink."
But it raises the greater war between him and his discretion.,Which goes on to impede his judgment.
"Why, this it is to have a name in great men’s fellowship. I had as lief have a reed that will do me no service as a partisan I could not heave.",That’s what happens when you partner with great men but lack their power. I’d rather carry a reed that obviously can’t protect me than a sword I cannot lift.
"To be called into a huge sphere, and not to be seen to move in ’t, are the holes where eyes should be, which pitifully disaster the cheeks.",To be so unimportant in the company of important men is like having a face without any eyes.
"Thus do they, sir: they take the flow o’ th’ Nile By certain scales i’ th’ Pyramid. They know By th’ height, the lowness, or the mean, if dearth The more it promises. As it ebbs, the seedsman Upon the slime and ooze scatters his grain, And shortly comes to harvest.","This is how they do it, sir: they measure the depth of the Nile, according to certain marks made on the walls of the Pyramid. They know by those measurements if there will be famine or plenty. The higher the Nile flows, the better the harvest. As the river ebbs, the farmer scatters his seeds on the remaining silt. The harvest comes shortly after that."
You’ve strange serpents there?,Do you have unusual snakes there?
"Ay, Lepidus.","Yes, Lepidus."
Your serpent of Egypt is bred now of your mud by the operation of your sun. So is your crocodile.,"The Egyptian snake is born when the sun shines on the Nile mud, just like the crocodile."
They are so.,"Yes, Lepidus."
"(to LEPIDUS ) Sit, and some wine. A health to Lepidus!",Let’s have a seat and some wine. A toast to Lepidus!
"I am not so well as I should be, but I’ll ne’er out.","I don’t feel so well, but I won’t stop."
Not till you have slept. I fear me you’ll be in till then.,Not until you pass out. I’m afraid you’ll keep going until then.
"Nay, certainly, I have heard the Ptolemies’ pyramises are very goodly things. Without contradiction I have heard that.","No, I certainly won’t stop. I’ve heard that the pyramids build by the Ptolemies are splendid. Without doubt I’ve heard that."
"(aside to POMPEY ) Pompey, a word.","(aside to POMPEY ) Pompey, could I have a word with you?"
(aside to MENAS ) Say in mine ear. What is ’t?,(aside to MENAS ) Whisper it in my ear. What is it?
"(aside to POMPEY ) Forsake thy seat, I do beseech thee, captain, And hear me speak a word.","(whispers in POMPEY ’s ear) Please, captain, leave the feast and let me speak with you privately."
(aside to MENAS ) Forbear me till anon.—This wine for Lepidus!,(aside to MENAS ) Leave me alone awhile. Where’s the wine for Lepidus?
What manner o’ thing is your crocodile?,What does a crocodile look like?
"It is shaped, sir, like itself, and it is as broad as it hath breadth. It is just so high as it is, and moves with its own organs. It lives by that which nourisheth it, and, the elements once out of it, it transmigrates.","Sir, it’s shaped like itself and is as wide as it has width. It is only as high as it is and moves with its own legs. It lives on what nourishes it, and when the four elements fire, air, earth, and water, thought to be the building blocks of all life the four elements leave it, its soul moves into another body."
What color is it of?,What color is it?
Of it own color too.,Its own color.
’Tis a strange serpent.,It’s a strange snake.
’Tis so. And the tears of it are wet.,It is that. And its tears are wet.
(aside to ANTONY ) Will this description satisfy him?,(aside to ANTONY ) Will that description satisfy him?
"(aside to CAESAR ) With the health that Pompey gives him, else he is a very epicure.","(aside to CAESAR ) That last toast Pompey gave him will take care of him, unless he’s a raging glutton."
"(aside to MENAS ) Go hang, sir, hang! Tell me of that? Away! Do as I bid you.—Where’s this cup I called for?","(aside to MENAS ) Go to hell, sir. Are you still here? Go away! Do what I tell you. Where’s the wine I ordered?"
"(aside to POMPEY ) If for the sake of merit thou wilt hear me, Rise from thy stool.","(aside to POMPEY ) If any service I’ve done you deserves a favor, get up from your stool and speak with me."
(aside to MENAS )     I think th’ art mad.,(aside to MENAS ) I think you’re crazy!
The matter?,What is it?
I have ever held my cap off to thy fortunes.,I’ve always had great respect for your destiny.
"Thou hast served me with much faith. What’s else to say?— (to the others) Be jolly, lords.","You’ve served me faithfully. What else can I say? (to the others) Be happy, lords!"
"These quicksands, Lepidus, Keep off them, for you sink.","Stay away from the quicksand of drink, Lepidus: you’re sinking."
(aside to POMPEY ) Wilt thou be lord of all the world?,(to POMPEY ) Would you like to be king of the entire world?
What sayst thou?,What are you saying?
Wilt thou be lord of the whole world? That’s twice.,Would you like to be king of the entire world? Now I’ve said it twice.
How should that be?,How could that happen?
"But entertain it, And, though thou think me poor, I am the man Will give thee all the world.","Just consider it. Though I seem poor, I am the man who will give you the world."
Hast thou drunk well?,Are you drunk?
"Thou art, if thou dar’st be, the earthly Jove. Whate’er the ocean pales or sky inclips Is thine, if thou wilt ha ’t.","No, Pompey, I haven’t had anything to drink. You can be the most powerful man on earth if you dare use your power. Both land and sea are yours if you will take them."
Show me which way.,Tell me how.
"These three world-sharers, these competitors, And, when we are put off, fall to their throats. All there is thine.","The three who share the known world are aboard your boat. Let me cut the anchor cable. When we are away from land, cut their throats. Everything that belongs to them is yours."
"Ah, this thou shouldst have done And not have spoke on ’t! In me ’tis villainy, In thee ’t had been good service. Thou must know, Mine honor, it. Repent that e’er thy tongue Hath so betrayed thine act. Being done unknown, I should have found it afterwards well done, But must condemn it now. Desist, and drink.","Oh, you should have done it without telling me! For me to do such a thing would be dishonorable. For you to do it would be good service. You should know that to me, profit isn’t more important than honor, but the other way around. Regret that your mouth betrayed your actions. If you had acted without my knowledge, I would have approved your action later. But now I must condemn it. Give it up and go drink."
I’ll never follow thy palled fortunes more. Who seeks and will not take when once ’tis offered Shall never find it more.,"(to himself) For this, I’ll never be faithful to your declining fortunes again. A person who wants something but won’t take it when it materializes won’t get the opportunity again."
This health to Lepidus!,This toast is for Lepidus!
"(to a servant) Bear him ashore.—I’ll pledge it for him, Pompey.","(to a servant) Help Lepidus ashore . . . I’ll accept it for him, Pompey."
"Here’s to thee, Menas!","Here’s to you, Menas."
"Enobarbus, welcome.","I accept with thanks, Enobarbus."
Fill till the cup be hid.,Fill the cups until they run over.
"There’s a strong fellow, Menas.","There goes a strong fellow, Menas."
Why?,Why do you say that?
"He bears The third part of the world, man. Seest not?",He carries a third of the world. Can’t you see that?
"The third part, then, is drunk. Would it were all,",Then a third of the world is drunk. I wish it were all drunk. Then everything would go more smoothly.
Drink thou. Increase the reels.,Drink up. Liven up the party.
Come.,"All right, then."
This is not yet an Alexandrian feast.,This hasn’t reached the level of an Egyptian feast yet.
"It ripens towards it. Strike the vessels, ho!",It’s getting there. Clink your cups together in a toast! Here’s to Caesar.
I could well forbear ’t. It’s monstrous labor when I wash my brain And it grows fouler.,"I could do without another toast. It’s unnatural. I keep washing my brain with alcohol, and it keeps getting fouler and more muddled."
Be a child o’ th’ time.,Live in the moment.
"Possess it, I’ll make answer. But I had rather fast from all four days",I’d prefer to seize the day. But I would rather abstain from everything for four days than drink so much in one.
"(to ANTONY )            Ha! My brave emperor, Shall we dance now the Egyptian bacchanals And celebrate our drink?","(to ANTONY ) Ha! Shall we dance Egyptian bacchanals bawdy dances honoring Bacchus, Roman god of wine bacchanals , my noble emperor, and celebrate our wine?"
"Let’s ha ’t, good soldier.","Let’s have one, good soldier."
"Come, let’s all take hands In soft and delicate Lethe.","Come, let’s join our hands until the overpowering wine makes us soft and forgetful."
"All take hands. Make battery to our ears with the loud music, The while I’ll place you; then the boy shall sing. The holding every man shall beat as loud","Everyone join hands. Attack our ears with loud music, and I’ll position you for the dance. Then the boy will sing, and every man will sing the chorus at the top of his voice."
"(Sings)     Come, thou monarch of the vine, Plumpy Bacchus with pink eyne! In thy vats our cares be drowned, With thy grapes our hairs be crowned.","(singing) Come, you king of the vine, plump Bacchus, with your pink eyes. Our troubles are drowned in your vats. We’ll crown ourselves with wreathes of grapes."
"(Singing) Cup us till the world go round, Cup us till the world go round!",(singing) Give us cups until the world spins! Give us cups until the world spins!
"What would you more?—Pompey, good night. (to ANTONY ) Good brother, Let me request you off. Our graver business You see we have burnt our cheeks. Strong Enobarb Is weaker than the wine; and mine own tongue Splits what it speaks. The wild disguise hath almost Anticked us all. What needs more words? Good night.","How can you top that? Good night, Pompey. (to ANTONY ) Dear brother-in-law, let’s leave together. This frivolity isn’t appropriate to the serious purpose that brought us here. Noble lords, let’s say good night. We’ve all gotten red in the face. Even the strong Enobarbus isn’t immune to the effects of wine, and I’m tongue-tied myself. This wild party has almost turned us all into clowns. What more need I say? Good night. Good Antony, shake my hand."
I’ll try you on the shore.,We’ll have a rematch at your feast on shore.
"And shall, sir. Give ’s your hand.","Yes, we will. Let’s shake on it."
"O Antony, You have my father’s house. But what? We are friends. Come, down into the boat.","Oh, Antony, even if you’ve taken my father’s house, what is that to me? We’re friends! Come, this way to the rowboat."
Take heed you fall not.,Be careful not to fall in.
"Menas, I’ll not on shore.","Menas, I’m not going back on shore."
"No, to my cabin. These drums, these trumpets, flutes! What! Let Neptune hear we bid a loud farewell To these great fellows. Sound and be hanged, sound out!","No, come to my cabin. We’ll have the musicians play drums, trumpets, flutes. What do you say? We’ll make Neptune Roman god of the sea Neptune hear us bid a loud good night to these great men. Play and be damned. Play loud!"
Hoo! says ’a. There’s my cap.,"Hooray, I say. There’s my hat!"
"Hoo! Noble captain, come.","Hooray! Come on, noble captain."
"Now, darting Parthia, art thou struck, and now Pleased fortune does of Marcus Crassus’ death Make me revenger. Bear the King’s son’s body Before our army. Thy Pacorus, Orodes,","Now I’ve paid you back, Parthia, and gotten revenge for Marcus Crassus’ death. Carry King Orodes Orodes was King of Parthia and father of Pacorus. He assassinated Marcus Crassus, a member of the first Roman triumvirate. King Orodes ’ son at the front of our army, so all the Parthians will know—Orodes, Pacorus pays for Marcus Crassus!"
"Noble Ventidius, Whilst yet with Parthian blood thy sword is warm, The fugitive Parthians follow. Spur through Media, Mesopotamia, and the shelters whither The routed fly. So thy grand captain, Antony, Put garlands on thy head.","Noble Ventidius, while your sword is still warm with the blood of slain Parthians, why not finish the job? The Parthians retreat. Go after them. Chase them down if you have to track them through Media, Mesopotamia Media and Mesopotamia were countries bordering Parthia Media, Mesopotamia , or any other places they may go to hide. Then our great general, Antony, will commend you."
"O Silius, Silius, I have done enough. A lower place, note well, May make too great an act. For learn this, Silius: Better to leave undone than by our deed Caesar and Antony have ever won More in their officer than person. Sossius, One of my place in Syria, his lieutenant, For quick accumulation of renown, Who does i’ th’ wars more than his captain can Becomes his captain’s captain; and ambition, The soldier’s virtue, rather makes choice of loss Than gain which darkens him. But ’twould offend him, and in his offense Should my performance perish.","Oh, Silius, Silius, I’ve done enough. A subordinate may exceed his authority. You must understand, Silius, that it’s better to leave something undone than achieve too much fame in your superior’s absence. Caesar and Antony have always achieved more by delegating authority to their officers than by leading their troops in person. Sossius, an officer that held the same position in Syria as I do here, achieved great distinction very quickly but lost Antony’s support as a result. A man who achieves more in war than his captain does becomes his captain’s rival. Ambition is a good quality in a soldier, but it proves detrimental rather than beneficial when used to surpass his superiors. I could do more to help Antony, but to do so would insult him. And by insulting him, I would lose credit for the good I have done him already."
"Thou hast, Ventidius, that Without the which a soldier and his sword","A soldier is just a tool, like his sword, unless he has your qualities, Ventidius. Are you going to write Antony about this?"
"I’ll humbly signify what in his name, That magical word of war, we have effected: How with his banners and his well-paid ranks The ne’er-yet-beaten horse of Parthia","I’ll modestly tell him what I have done in his name—that’s the magical wording these days. I’ll write how, under his flag and with his well-paid troops, we have beaten the formerly unvanquished Parthia."
Where is he now?,Where’s Antony now?
"He purposeth to Athens, whither, with what haste The weight we must convey with’s will permit, We shall appear before him. (to the soliders) On, there. Pass along!","He plans to go to Athens. We must arrive there before him, as quickly as our baggage train will allow us. (to the soldiers) Get a move on!"
"What, are the brothers parted?",Did the brothers-in-law leave?
"They have dispatched with Pompey; he is gone. The other three are sealing. Octavia weeps To part from Rome. Caesar is sad, and Lepidus, With the greensickness.","They finished their business with Pompey, and Pompey has left. Now the three triumvirs are putting their official seals on the treaty. Octavia weeps at the thought of leaving Rome. Caesar is in a sober mood. And Menas reports that Lepidus has been hungover since Pompey’s party."
’Tis a noble Lepidus.,That Lepidus is an elegant man. A pun: lepidus means “elegant” in Latin. That Lepidus is an elegant man.
"A very fine one. Oh, how he loves Caesar!",He’s a stylish man. And how he loves Caesar!
"Nay, but how dearly he adores Mark Antony!","Yes, but how he adores Mark Antony!"
"Caesar? Why, he’s the Jupiter of men.",Caesar? He’s a god of a man. Enobarbus and Agrippa mock Lepidus’ excessive flattery. He’s a god of a man.
What’s Antony? The god of Jupiter.,Then what’s Antony? A god of a god?
"Spake you of Caesar? How, the nonpareil!",Are you talking about Caesar? He’s without equal!
"O Antony, O thou Arabian bird!","Oh, Antony! Oh, you phoenix mythical bird, symbol of immortality phoenix !"
"Would you praise Caesar, say “Caesar.” Go no further.","If you want to praise Caesar, just say his name—that’s all the praise that’s necessary."
"Indeed, he plied them both with excellent praises.",He certainly flattered them both with extravagant compliments.
"Hoo! Hearts, tongues, figures, scribes, bards, poets, cannot Think, speak, cast, write, sing, number—hoo!— His love to Antony. But as for Caesar, Kneel down, kneel down, and wonder.","He loves Caesar best, but he also loves Antony. Oh! No one can describe or fathom Lepidus’ love for Antony! Hearts cannot think it, tongues cannot speak it, meas-urements cannot calculate it, scribes cannot write it, bards cannot sing it, and poets cannot make verses about it. But when it comes to Caesar, Lepidus’ love approaches the awestruck wonder of a worshipper."
Both he loves.,He loves them both.
"They are his shards, and he their beetle Shard-beetles make their home in dung heaps. their beetle .","They are his dung, and he their beetle."
"So, This is to horse. Adieu, noble Agrippa.","So, there’s the signal to ride. Good-bye, noble Agrippa."
"Good fortune, worthy soldier, and farewell.","Good luck, worthy soldier, and good-bye."
"No further, sir.","You can’t go any further with us, sir."
"You take from me a great part of myself; As my thoughts make thee, and as my farthest bond Shall pass on thy approof.—Most noble Antony, Let not the piece of virtue, which is set Betwixt us as the cement of our love, The fortress of it. For better might we Have loved without this mean, if on both parts This be not cherished.","You take an important part of myself with you. Treat it well . . . . Sister, be the kind of wife I hope you will be, and that this great contract rests upon your being . . . Gracious Antony, don’t let my sister, this epitome of virtue that connects us, become the reason we separate. If you and I don’t value her equally, it would be better for us to work out our differences without her."
Make me not offended In your distrust.,Don’t insult me with your distrust.
I have said.,I mean what I say.
"You shall not find, For what you seem to fear. So the gods keep you And make the hearts of Romans serve your ends. We will here part.","You won’t find any cause for anxiety, even if you look for one. So, may the gods protect you and change the hearts of the Romans so that they turn and give you their support. We’ll leave you here."
"Farewell, my dearest sister, fare thee well. Thy spirits all of comfort! Fare thee well.","Good-bye, my dearest sister, good-bye. I hope you have good weather to set your mind at ease. Farewell."
My noble brother!,My noble brother!
"The April’s in her eyes; it is love’s spring, And these the showers to bring it on. (to OCTAVIA ) Be cheerful.",Her eyes are like April: full of showers. But they’ll flower into love. (to OCTAVIA ) Be cheerful.
"(to CAESAR ) Sir, look well to my husband’s house, and—","(to CAESAR ) Take care of my former husband’s property, and—"
"What, Octavia?","What is it, Octavia?"
I’ll tell you in your ear.,I’ll tell you privately.
"Her tongue will not obey her heart, nor can Her heart inform her tongue—the swan’s-down feather That stands upon the swell at the full of tide","She won’t say what she’s feeling, and she can’t understand her feelings. She’s balanced uneasily, like a feather on the swell of a great wave—she won’t move, even though her situation is about to change."
(aside to AGRIPPA ) Will Caesar weep?,(aside to AGRIPPA ) Do you think Caesar will cry?
(aside to ENOBARBUS ) He has a cloud in ’s face.,(aside to ENOBARBUS ) He does look like it.
"(aside to AGRIPPA ) He were the worse for that, were he a horse; So is he, being a man.","(aside to AGRIPPA ) If he were a horse, watery eyes would lower his value. Men aren’t supposed to cry, either."
"(aside to ENOBARBUS )  Why, Enobarbus, He cried almost to roaring, and he wept When at Philippi he found Brutus slain.","(aside to ENOBARBUS ) Why, Enobarbus, when Antony saw that Julius Caesar was dead, he cried terribly. And he wept when he found that Brutus had been killed at Philippi."
"(aside to AGRIPPA ) That year indeed he was troubled with a rheum. What willingly he did confound he wailed,","(aside to AGRIPPA ) He certainly did have rheumy eyes that year. Whenever he had to kill, he cried—it’s true!—until I cried too."
"(coming forward with OCTAVIA ) No, sweet Octavia, You shall hear from me still. The time shall not Outgo my thinking on you.","(returning with OCTAVIA ) Don’t worry, sweet Octavia, I’ll always write to you, and I’ll think about you all the time."
"Come, sir, come, I’ll wrestle with you in my strength of love. Look, here I have you.","Come here, sir. I’ll wrestle with you out of love. See, now I have you."
Thus I let you go,And thus I let you go and give you to the gods.
Adieu. Be happy.,Good-bye. Be happy.
(to ANTONY ) Let all the number of the stars give light To thy fair way.,(to ANTONY ) May every star light your path.
"Farewell, farewell.","Farewell, farewell."
Farewell.,Farewell.
Where is the fellow?,Where is that messenger?
Half afeard to come.,He’s afraid to come in.
"Go to, go to.—Come hither, sir.","Oh, come on.—Come here, sir."
"Good majesty, Herod of Jewry dare not look upon you But when you are well pleased.","Gracious Queen, even Herod of Judea wouldn’t dare look at you unless you were in a good mood."
That Herod’s head Through whom I might command it? (to MESSENGER ) Come thou near.,"I’ll have Herod’s head chopped off! But now that Antony’s gone, who will do it for me? (to MESSENGER ) Come closer."
Most gracious majesty!,Most formidable Queen!
Didst thou behold Octavia?,Did you see Octavia?
"Ay, dread Queen.","Yes, revered Queen."
Where?,Where?
"Madam, in Rome. I looked her in the face, and saw her led","In Rome, Madam. I saw her face as she walked with her brother and Mark Antony."
Is she as tall as me?,Is she as tall as I am?
"She is not, madam.","She is not, madam."
Didst hear her speak? Is she shrill-tongued or low?,Did you hear her speak? Is her voice pitched high or low?
"Madam, I heard her speak. She is low-voiced.","Madam, I heard her speak. She has a low-pitched voice."
That’s not so good. He cannot like her long.,That’s not in her favor. He can’t like her very long.
"Like her? O Isis, ’tis impossible.","Like her? Oh, Isis, that’s impossible."
"I think so, Charmian. Dull of tongue, and dwarfish.— What majesty is in her gait? Remember, If e’er thou looked’st on majesty.","You’re right, Charmian. She’s both dull-spoken and dwarfishly little.—Did she carry herself with majesty? Compare her to any memory you might have of royalty."
She creeps. Her motion and her station are as one. A statue than a breather.,"She creeps along. Moving or standing still, her bearing is about the same. She has a body, not a life. She’s more like a statue than a living, breathing human being."
Is this certain?,Is this true?
Or I have no observance.,"If not, then I have no powers of observation."
Three in Egypt Cannot make better note.,There aren’t three people in all of Egypt who could do better.
"He’s very knowing, I do perceive ’t. There’s nothing in her yet.",He’s very observant. I can tell. She doesn’t have anything going for her so far. This messenger is wise.
Excellent.,Very wise.
"(to MESSENGER ) Guess at her years, I prithee.",(to MESSENGER ) How old do you think she is?
"Madam, she was a widow—","She was a widow previously, madam."
"Widow? Charmian, hark.","A widow? Do you hear that, Charmian?"
And I do think she’s thirty.,And I think she’s at least thirty.
Bear’st thou her face in mind? Is ’t long or round?,Do you remember her face? Was it long or round?
"Round, even to faultiness.",Round enough to be unattractive.
"For the most part, too, they are foolish that are so. Her hair, what color?",Usually that means a person is foolish. What color is her hair?
"Brown, madam, and her forehead","Brown, madam, and she wouldn’t want her forehead to be any lower."
(giving money)             There’s gold for thee. Thou must not take my former sharpness ill. I will employ thee back again; I find thee Most fit for business. Go make thee ready; Our letters are prepared.,"Here’s gold for you. You mustn’t hold my earlier outburst against me. I’ll hire you again to go back to Rome. I find that you’re very good at this kind of work. Go, prepare to travel. My letters are ready to go."
A proper man.,He’s an admirable man.
"That so I harried him. Why, methinks, by him, This creature’s no such thing.","He certainly is. I’m very sorry I was so hard on him. Why, from what he says, Octavia isn’t worth getting upset over."
"Nothing, madam.","Not a bit, madam."
The man hath seen some majesty and should know.,This man’s been around royalty. He should recognize it when he sees it.
"Hath he seen majesty? Isis else defend,","Been around royalty! Isis forbid it were otherwise, since he’s been in your service so long."
"I have one thing more to ask him yet, good Charmian— But ’tis no matter; thou shalt bring him to me Where I will write. All may be well enough.","I want to ask him one more thing, Charmian. But it’s not important. Bring him to my writing room. Everything may still be all right."
"I warrant you, madam.","I assure you it is, madam."
"Nay, nay, Octavia, not only that— That were excusable, that and thousands more Of semblable import—but he hath waged New wars ’gainst Pompey; made his will, and read it Spoke scantly of me; when perforce he could not But pay me terms of honor, cold and sickly He vented them, most narrow measure lent me. When the best hint was given him, he not took ’t,","No, no, Octavia, it’s not only that. That would be excusable—that and a thousand other offenses like it. But Caesar has gone and waged a new war against Pompey. He made his will and read it in a public assembly. Roman politicians could gain popularity among the common people by writing a will that included bequests in their favor, such as sums of money, parkland, or orchards dedicated to their use. He made his will and read it in a public assembly. He hardly refers to me at all, though official decisions are supposed to be made jointly. When he can’t avoid mentioning my services to the state, he minimizes them as much as possible. When situations arise when it would be natural to emphasize my due credit, he either ignores them or only pays me lip service."
"O my good lord, Believe not all, or, if you must believe, Stomach not all. A more unhappy lady, If this division chance, ne’er stood between, Praying for both parts. When I shall pray “O bless my lord and husband!” Undo that prayer by crying out as loud “O bless my brother!” Husband win, win brother Prays and destroys the prayer; no midway","Oh, dear husband, don’t believe everything you hear—or if you must believe it, don’t let it all make you angry. No lady could be more miserable than I if you two disagree. I’ll be left in the middle, praying for both sides. The good gods will laugh at me when on the one hand I pray for my husband and on the other for my brother. “Let my husband win!” “Let my brother win!” One prayer cancels out the other. There’s no middle ground between these two extremes."
"Gentle Octavia, Let your best love draw to that point which seeks Best to preserve it. If I lose mine honor, I lose myself; better I were not yours Than yours so branchless. But, as you requested, I’ll raise the preparation of a war Shall stain your brother. Make your soonest haste; So your desires are yours.","Gentle Octavia, support the one that supports you. If I’m defeated, I lose my reputation. If I lose my reputation, I lose myself. It would be better for you to have no husband than a husband who lacks honor. However, as you requested, you may go and try to negotiate with your brother. In the meantime, I’ll raise an army that will surpass his. Go as soon as possible, so your prayers may be answered the sooner."
"Thanks to my lord. The Jove of power make me most weak, most weak, As if the world should cleave, and that slain men Should solder up the rift.","Thank you, my lord. May the god of power make me, the weakest of the weak, your mediator. A war between you two would split the very world, and the bodies of your slaughtered soldiers would have to fill the chasm between."
"When it appears to you where this begins, Turn your displeasure that way, for our faults Can equally move with them. Provide your going; Choose your own company and command what cost Your heart has mind to.","When you find out who started this disagreement, turn your anger upon them. Our faults can’t be so alike that you would judge us similarly. Order supplies for your trip and choose your traveling companions. Spend as much as you like."
"How now, friend Eros!","How goes it, friend Eros?"
"There’s strange news come, sir.","Some startling news has just arrived, sir."
"What, man?","What news, man?"
Caesar and Lepidus have made wars upon Pompey.,Caesar and Lepidus declared war against Pompey.
This is old. What is the success?,That’s old news. Who’s winning?
"Caesar, having made use of him in the wars ’gainst Pompey, presently denied him rivality, would not let him partake in the glory of the action, and, not resting here, accuses him of letters he had formerly wrote to Pompey; upon his own appeal seizes him. So the poor third is up, till death enlarge his confine.","Caesar used Lepidus in the war, but as soon as it was over, Lepidus was expelled from the triumvirate. He wasn’t allowed any of the glory of the victory, and he was accused of treasonous correspondence with Pompey. On the basis of Caesar’s accusation alone, Lepidus was imprisoned. So the weak third of the triumvirate is imprisoned until death frees him."
"Then, world, thou hast a pair of chaps, no more, And throw between them all the food thou hast, They’ll grind the one the other. Where’s Antony?","So now the world will only be devoured by two sets of jaws—Caesar’s and Antony’s. And even if you throw everything you possess to the two of them, they’ll battle each other to the death to have it all. Where’s Antony?"
"The rush that lies before him; cries, “Fool Lepidus!” And threats the throat of that his officer That murdered Pompey.","He’s walking in the garden, like this (imitating anger). And he kicks the leaves on the path, exclaiming, “Lepidus, you fool!” Then he threatens to kill the officer who murdered Pompey. Pompey was killed by one of Antony’s officers, Titius, during his campaign for Antony’s territories. Some historians believe that Titius acted on Antony’s specific order. Then he threatens to kill the officer who murdered Pompey."
Our great navy’s rigged.,Antony’s grand navy is prepared.
"For Italy and Caesar. More, Domitius: I might have told hereafter.","To sail to Italy and Caesar. Another thing, Domitius: Antony wants to see you now. I should have waited to tell you my news."
"’Twill be naught, But let it be. Bring me to Antony.",It won’t be that important. But never mind. Take me to Antony.
"Come, sir.","Come with me, sir."
"Contemning Rome, he has done all this and more In Alexandria. Here’s the manner of ’t: I’ th’ marketplace, on a tribunal silvered, Cleopatra and himself in chairs of gold Caesarion, whom they call my father’s son, And all the unlawful issue that their lust Since then hath made between them. Unto her He gave the stablishment of Egypt, made her Absolute Queen.","In Alexandria he condemned Rome, and that’s not all. This is what happened: he and Cleopatra sat on chairs of gold on a silver-covered stage in the marketplace. Caesarion—whom they call my father’s son— Julius Caesar was Octavius Caesar’s adopted father (biologically, he was his uncle). Caesarion—whom they call my father’s son— and all their illegitimate children sat at their feet. Antony confirmed her possession of Egypt and made her absolute Queen of lower Syria, Cyprus, and Lydia."
This in the public eye?,He did this in public?
"I’ th’ common showplace, where they exercise. His sons he there proclaimed the kings of kings: Great Media, Parthia, and Armenia Syria, Cilicia, and Phoenicia. She In th’ habiliments of the goddess Isis That day appeared, and oft before gave audience, As ’tis reported, so.","In the public arena, where they perform sporting events. He proclaimed his sons to be kings of kings. He gave Media, Parthia, and Armenia to Alexander. He gave Syria, Cilicia, and Phoenicia to Ptolemy. Cleopatra was dressed like the goddess Isis. They say she often attended her public functions like that."
Let Rome be thus informed.,Let’s send this news to Rome.
"Who, queasy with his insolence already, Will their good thoughts call from him.",The Roman people are fed up with his arrogance already. They’ll abandon him completely when they hear this.
"The people knows it, and have now received His accusations.","The people have heard it already, and they’ve been told of his accusations."
Who does he accuse?,Who does he accuse?
"Sextus Pompeius spoiled, we had not rated him His part o’ th’ isle. Then does he say he lent me Some shipping, unrestored. Lastly, he frets That Lepidus of the triumvirate All his revenue.","He accuses me of withholding his share of Sextus Pompeius’ possessions, which we seized in Sicily. Then he says I didn’t return some ships he loaned me. Finally, he criticizes the deposing of Lepidus, and then goes on to accuse me of keeping all of Lepidus’ property for myself."
"Sir, this should be answered.","Sir, these accusations should be answered."
"’Tis done already, and the messenger gone. I have told him, Lepidus was grown too cruel, That he his high authority abused I grant him part; but then, in his Armenia, And other of his conquered kingdoms, I Demand the like.","It has been done already, and the messenger is on his way. I answered that Lepidus had become too brutal and abused his position. For this he deserved to be deposed. As for what I seized in the wars, I granted that Antony should have a share. But I also demanded my share of his acquisitions in Armenia and the other conquered kingdoms."
He’ll never yield to that.,He’ll never agree to that.
Nor must not then be yielded to in this.,Then we won’t agree to his demands.
"Hail, Caesar, and my lord! Hail, most dear Caesar!","Greetings, Caesar, my lord! Greetings, dearest Caesar!"
That ever I should call thee castaway!,"Oh, to think you’ve been rejected!"
"You have not called me so, nor have you cause.","You’ve never thought of me like that, and you have no reason to."
"Why have you stol’n upon us thus? You come not Like Caesar’s sister. The wife of Antony The neighs of horse to tell of her approach Long ere she did appear. The trees by th’ way Should have borne men, and expectation fainted, Longing for what it had not. Nay, the dust Raised by your populous troops. But you are come A market-maid to Rome and have prevented The ostentation of our love, which, left unshown, Is often left unloved. We should have met you With an augmented greeting.","Then why did you travel so quietly? You didn’t arrive like Caesar’s sister. Antony’s wife should have an army to escort her, with neighing horses to announce her arrival long before she appears. The trees along the road should have been filled with eager spectators. Crowds should have been faint with excitement waiting to see you. The dust from your attending troops should have risen to heaven. But you’ve arrived like a common maid bringing goods to a Roman market. You’ve kept me from displaying my love—and when love is not shown, it’s often not felt. I would have met you by sea and again by land. At each stage of your trip there would have been a more spectacular greeting."
"Good my lord, To come thus was I not constrained, but did it On my free will. My lord, Mark Antony, Hearing that you prepared for war, acquainted His pardon for return.","My good lord, I wasn’t forced to travel like this. It was my choice. Mark Antony heard that you were preparing to wage war on him. When he gave me this news, I begged him to let me visit you."
"Which soon he granted, Being an obstruct ’tween his lust and him.","Which he quickly allowed, given that you’re an obstacle to his lust."
"Do not say so, my lord.","Don’t say that, my lord."
"I have eyes upon him, And his affairs come to me on the wind.","I’ve kept track of him, and reports of his affairs arrive on every ship. Where do you think he is now?"
"My lord, in Athens.","He’s in Athens, my lord."
"No, my most wrongèd sister. Cleopatra Hath nodded him to her. He hath given his empire Up to a whore; who now are levying Bocchus, the King of Libya; Archelaus, Of Cappadocia; Philadelphos, King Of Paphlagonia; the Thracian king, Adallas; King Manchus of Arabia; King of Pont; Of Comagen; Polemon and Amyntas, The Kings of Mede and Lycaonia, With a more larger list of scepters.","No, he’s not. You’ve been deceived. Cleopatra summoned him. He’s given his empire to a whore, and now they’re gathering kings to wage a war. He’s recruited Bocchus, the King of Libya; Archelaus of Cappadocia; Philadelphos, King of Paphlagonia; the Thracian king, Adallas; King Manchus of Arabia; the King of Pont; Herod, of Judea; Mithridates, King of Comagen; Polemon and Amyntas, the kings of Mede and Lycaonia, and many more."
"Ay me, most wretched, That does afflict each other!","Oh, I’m heartbroken. I’m divided between two friends who are determined to kill each other."
"Welcome hither. Your letters did withhold our breaking forth Till we perceived both how you were wrong led And we in negligent danger. Cheer your heart. O’er your content these strong necessities, But let determined things to destiny Hold unbewailed their way. Welcome to Rome, Nothing more dear to me. You are abused To do you justice, makes his ministers Of us and those that love you. Best of comfort, And ever welcome to us.","You’re welcome here. I didn’t write about breaking the alliance with Antony until I saw you were being misled and realized how dangerous it would be to keep postponing preparations. Cheer yourself. Don’t be troubled by the present situation, the obligations of which must ruin your happiness. Don’t worry about things that have already been decided by fate. Welcome home to Rome. Nothing is more precious to me than you. You have been unbelievably abused, and now the gods make us the dispensers of justice. Be comforted. You will always be welcome to me."
"Welcome, lady.","Welcome, lady."
"Welcome, dear madam. Only th’ adulterous Antony, most large In his abominations, turns you off And gives his potent regiment to a trull That noises it against us.","Welcome, dear madam. Every heart in Rome loves and pities you. Only the adulterous and abominable Antony abandons you, giving his power to a whore who turns that power against us."
"(to CAESAR )            Is it so, sir?","(to CAESAR ) Is that true, sir?"
Be ever known to patience. My dear’st sister!,"It’s undeniable. You are welcome here, sister. I beg you to continue to be patient. My dearest sister!"
"I will be even with thee, doubt it not.",I’ll be straight with you. Do not doubt it.
"But why, why, why?","But why, why, why?"
Thou hast forspoke my being in these wars And sayst it is not fit.,You opposed my taking part in the war. You said it wasn’t proper.
"Well, is it, is it?","Well, is it? Is it?"
Be there in person?,Isn’t this war against me? Why shouldn’t I be there in person?
"Well, I could reply, If we should serve with horse and mares together, The horse were merely lost. The mares would bear A soldier and his horse.","Well, I could answer that if we went to war on male and female horses alike—the male horses would be totally distracted and useless. The mares would be ridden by their riders and the male horses."
What is ’t you say?,What do you mean?
"Take from his heart, take from his brain, from ’s time What should not then be spared. He is already Traduced for levity, and ’tis said in Rome That Photinus, an eunuch, and your maids",Antony will necessarily be distracted by your presence. You will affect his heart and his head. You’ll take up time he can’t afford to lose. He’s already criticized for frivolous behavior. In Rome they say that your eunuch Photinus and your maids run the war.
"Sink Rome! And their tongues rot That speak against us! A charge we bear i’ th’ war, And as the president of my kingdom will Appear there for a man. Speak not against it. I will not stay behind.","Let Rome fall! May the tongues of our critics rot! I have responsibilities in this war, and as the absolute ruler of my kingdom I will carry out my duties as if I were a man. Don’t argue against it. I won’t stay behind."
"Nay, I have done.","No, I’ve had my say. Here comes the Emperor."
"Is it not strange, Canidius, That from Tarentum and Brundusium He could so quickly cut the Ionian sea And take in Toryne?—You have heard on ’t, sweet?","Isn’t it strange, Canidius, that he could cross the Ionian Sea so quickly from Tarentum and Brundusium and take Toryne?—Have you heard about this, sweet?"
Celerity is never more admired,No one admires speed more than the lazy.
"A good rebuke, Which might have well becomed the best of men, To taunt at slackness.—Canidius, we will fight With him by sea.","That’s a good reprimand, suitable for reminding even the best of men to guard against negligence. Canidius, we’ll fight him at sea."
"By sea, what else?",Of course we’ll fight him by sea. What else?
Why will My lord do so?,"Why do you want to do that, my lord?"
For that he dares us to ’t.,Because he’s daring us to do it.
So hath my lord dared him to single fight.,So you’ve dared him to single combat.
"Ay, and to wage this battle at Pharsalia, Where Caesar fought with Pompey. But these offers, Which serve not for his vantage, he shakes off, And so should you.","Yes, and you dared Caesar to fight the battle at Pharsalia, where he fought against Pompey. But Caesar ignores offers that don’t give him an advantage, and so should you."
"Your ships are not well manned, Engrossed by swift impress. In Caesar’s fleet Are those that often have ’gainst Pompey fought. Their ships are yare, yours, heavy. No disgrace Shall fall you for refusing him at sea,","Your ships are not well crewed. Your sailors are mule drivers, harvesters—men who were drafted quickly and have little training. Caesar’s fleet is manned by mariners who already have experience battling Pompey. His ships are maneuverable. Yours are slow and awkward. Refusing to fight him at sea won’t disgrace you. You’ve prepared for a land war."
"By sea, by sea.",I will fight by sea. By sea.
"Most worthy sir, you therein throw away The absolute soldiership you have by land, Distract your army, which doth most consist Of war-marked footmen, leave unexecuted The way which promises assurance, and Give up yourself merely to chance and hazard From firm security.","Most worthy sir, if you do that you throw away all the advantages you have on land. You will have to divide your army, which mostly consists of battle-hardened foot soldiers. You will be unable to use your legendary battle knowledge. You’ll be abandoning proven methods that promise victory, and instead you’ll put yourself at the mercy of haphazard chance."
I’ll fight at sea.,I’ll fight at sea.
"I have sixty sails, Caesar none better.",I have sixty ships. Caesar doesn’t have any that are better.
"And with the rest full-manned, from th’ head of Actium Beat th’ approaching Caesar. But if we fail, We then can do ’t at land.","We’ll burn our surplus ships and fully man the rest. We’ll sail from Actium and beat Caesar as he approaches. Even if we fail at that, we can still fight him on land."
Thy business?,What’s your business?
"The news is true, my lord. He is descried.","The news is true, my lord. Caesar has been seen. He has captured Toryne."
"Can he be there in person? ’Tis impossible, Strange that his power should be. Canidius, Our nineteen legions thou shalt hold by land, And our twelve thousand horse. We’ll to our ship.","Can Caesar be there in person? No, that’s impossible. It’s strange enough that his army should be there. Canidius, take our nineteen legions military division consisting of , armored infantrymen legions and twelve thousand horse soldiers. You must hold them on land. We’ll go to our ship. Come away, Cleopatra."
"How now, worthy soldier?","What’s the news, brave soldier?"
"O noble Emperor, do not fight by sea! Trust not to rotten planks. Do you misdoubt This sword and these my wounds? Let th’ Egyptians And the Phoenicians go a-ducking. We And fighting foot to foot.","Oh, don’t fight by sea, noble Emperor! Don’t trust rotten planks. Don’t you trust my sword and these wounds? Let the Egyptians and Phoenicians go swimming. We are used to winning by standing on the earth and fighting toe to toe."
"Well, well, away.","Well, well, let’s go."
"By Hercules, I think I am i’ th’ right.","By Hercules, I think I’m right."
"Soldier, thou art; but his whole action grows Not in the power on ’t. So our leader’s led,","Soldier, you are. But Antony’s decisions aren’t coming from his extensive experience. Our leader is being led. We are following a woman."
"You keep by land The legions and the horse whole, do you not?","On land you keep the legions and cavalry together, don’t you?"
"Marcus Octavius, Marcus Justeius, Publicola, and Caelius, are for sea; But we keep whole by land. This speed of Caesar’s","Marcus Octavius, Marcus Justeius, Publicola, and Caelius will go by sea, but we’ll keep the bulk on land. Caesar’s speed defies belief."
While he was yet in Rome His power went out in such distractions as Beguiled all spies.,"While he was still in Rome, he deployed his forces in so many different disguises that all our spies were fooled."
"Who’s his lieutenant, hear you?","Who’s his lieutenant, do you know?"
"They say, one Taurus.","A man named Taurus, they say."
Well I know the man.,I know the man well.
The Emperor calls Canidius.,The Emperor is calling for Canidius.
"With news the time’s with labor, and throws forth Each minute some.","The present time is like a woman in labor, each minute giving birth to some piece of news."
Taurus!,Taurus!
My lord?,My lord?
Strike not by land; keep whole. Provoke not battle Till we have done at sea. Do not exceed,Don’t attack by land. Keep the army together. Don’t provoke them to battle until we have finished at sea. Don’t exceed your orders as written here.
Our fortune lies Upon this jump.,Our fate depends on this chance.
"Set we our squadrons on yond side o’ th’ hill, In eye of Caesar’s battle, from which place We may the number of the ships behold And so proceed accordingly.","Assemble our squadrons on the other side of the hill, in sight of Caesar’s navy. From there we’ll be able to see how many ships he has and plan accordingly."
"Naught, naught, all naught! I can behold no longer. Th’ Antoniad, the Egyptian admiral, With all their sixty, fly and turn the rudder. To see ’t mine eyes are blasted.","We’re ruined, ruined, ruined! I can’t watch any more. The Egyptian flagship, the Antoniad, followed by all sixty Egyptian ships, has turned and fled. It destroyed my eyes to look upon it."
"Gods and goddesses,",Gods and goddesses—the whole congregation of them!
What’s thy passion?,What’s wrong with you?
The greater cantle of the world is lost With very ignorance. We have kissed away Kingdoms and provinces.,We have lost a major portion of the world through utter foolishness. We have kissed away entire kingdoms and provinces.
How appears the fight?,How goes the battle?
"On our side like the tokened pestilence, Whom leprosy o’ertake!—i’ th’ midst o’ th’ fight, When vantage like a pair of twins appeared Both as the same, or rather ours the elder, The breeze upon her, like a cow in June,","Our side shows all the signs of certain defeat, which appear like the symptomatic sores of the plague. Right in the middle of the fight, just when the battle could have gone either way—actually we had a slight advantage—that immoral Egyptian nag—May she die of leprosy!—suddenly became frightened, and turned her ships around and fled."
That I beheld. Mine eyes did sicken at the sight and could not Endure a further view.,I saw that. The sight made me so sick I couldn’t watch any more.
"She once being loofed, The noble ruin of her magic, Antony, Leaving the fight in height, flies after her. I never saw an action of such shame. Experience, manhood, honor, ne’er before Did violate so itself.","Once she had turned around, the noble Antony, ruined by love, hoisted his own sails and followed her like a lovesick duck. He left the battle at the most crucial point. I never saw such a shameful act. He betrayed his own experience, manhood, and honor."
"Alack, alack!",Terrible. Terrible.
"And sinks most lamentably. Had our general Been what he knew himself, it had gone well. Oh, he has given example for our flight Most grossly by his own!","The battle on the sea is almost lost. If our general had been his old self, we would have won. Oh, with his sordid desertion, he sets the example for our own."
"Ay, are you thereabouts? Why then, good night indeed.","Are you considering desertion, as well? Then everything must really be finished."
Toward Peloponnesus are they fled.,They fled toward Peloponnesus.
"’Tis easy to ’t, and there I will attend What further comes.",It’s easy to get there. I’ll go there and ascertain their next move.
To Caesar will I render My legions and my horse. Six kings already,"I’ll yield my legions and cavalry to Caesar. In this, I follow the examples of the six kings who have already surrendered."
"I’ll yet follow The wounded chance of Antony, though my reason Sits in the wind against me.","I’ll still follow Antony, even though the odds are against him and good sense tells me I should go the other way."
"Hark. The land bids me tread no more upon ’t. It is ashamed to bear me. Friends, come hither. I am so lated in the world that I Have lost my way forever. I have a ship And make your peace with Caesar.","Listen. The earth tells me to stop walking upon it, as it’s ashamed to carry me. Friends, come here. I’m completely lost. I have a ship full of treasure. Take that. Divide it. Escape and make peace with Caesar."
Fly? Not we.,Flee? Not us.
"I have fled myself, and have instructed cowards To run and show their shoulders. Friends, begone. I have myself resolved upon a course My treasure’s in the harbor. Take it. Oh, I followed that I blush to look upon! My very hairs do mutiny, for the white Reprove the brown for rashness, and they them Have letters from me to some friends that will Sweep your way for you. Pray you, look not sad, Nor make replies of loathness. Take the hint Which my despair proclaims. Let that be left I will possess you of that ship and treasure. Leave me, I pray, a little. Pray you now, Nay, do so, for indeed I have lost command. Therefore I pray you. I’ll see you by and by.","I have already fled from my true self. I’ve told cowards to turn their backs on me and run. Friends, go. I’ve decided on a plan that doesn’t require your assistance. Leave. My treasure’s in the harbor; take it. Oh, I followed something I’m ashamed to look at now! Even my hair revolts. The white hairs blame the brown hairs for being irresponsible, and the brown ones blame the white ones for being spineless and foolish. Friends, go. I’ll give you letters of introduction to some friends of mine who will help you. Please, don’t be sad, and don’t tell me how reluctant you are. Take your cues from my own despair. Abandon the person that has abandoned himself. Go to the harbor immediately! I’ll give you the title to that ship and its treasure. Just give me a moment, please—only a moment. I’ve relinquished my authority, so please—I’ll see you all before long."
"Nay, gentle madam, to him, comfort him.","No, gentle madam, go. Comfort him."
"Do, most dear Queen.","Yes, do, dearest Queen."
"Do. Why, what else?",Of course you must comfort him! What else?
Let me sit down. O Juno!,"Let me sit down. Oh, Juno queen of the Roman gods Juno !"
"(seeing CLEOPATRA ) No, no, no, no, no.","(seeing CLEOPATRA ) No, no, no, no, no."
"See you here, sir?","Do you see her, sir?"
"Oh, fie, fie, fie!","Oh, damn, damn, damn!"
Madam!,Madam!
"Madam, O good Empress!","Madam, oh, good Empress!"
"Sir, sir—",Sir . . . sir . . .
"His sword e’en like a dancer, while I struck The lean and wrinkled Cassius, and ’twas I That the mad Brutus ended. He alone Dealt on lieutenantry, and no practice had","(to himself) Yes, my lord, that’s true. At Philippi, Caesar kept his sword in its sheath, like a dancer, while I commanded the armies that conquered Cassius and Brutus. Caesar fought only through lieutenants. He had no experience with the brave contests of war. But now . . . never mind."
"Ah, stand by.","Ah, give us some privacy."
"The Queen, my lord, the Queen.","The Queen is here, my lord."
"Go to him, madam, speak to him. He is unqualitied with very shame.","Go to him, madam, speak to him. He’s not himself because he feels so ashamed."
"Well then, sustain me. Oh!","Well, then, help me."
"Her head’s declined, and death will seize her but Your comfort makes the rescue.","Most noble sir, stand up. The Queen is coming. She’s weak and will die unless you comfort her."
"I have offended reputation, A most unnoble swerving.","I’ve destroyed my reputation, a most shameful error."
"Sir, the Queen.","Sir, here’s the Queen."
How I convey my shame out of thine eyes By looking back what I have left behind ’Stroyed in dishonor.,"Oh, where have you led me, Egypt? See how I hide my shame from you by turning around? I look behind me to see my past, destroyed by dishonor."
"O my lord, my lord, Forgive my fearful sails! I little thought","Oh, my lord, my lord, forgive my panic! I didn’t think you would follow me."
"Egypt, thou knew’st too well My heart was to thy rudder tied by th’ strings, And thou shouldst tow me after. O’er my spirit Thy full supremacy thou knew’st, and that Thy beck might from the bidding of the gods","Queen, you knew very well that my heart was tied to your ship and that you would pull me along with you. You knew that my spirit was completely under your control and that I would ignore the gods’ orders in favor of yours."
"Oh, my pardon!","Oh, forgive me!"
"Now I must To the young man send humble treaties, dodge And palter in the shifts of lowness, who With half the bulk o’ th’ world played as I pleased, Making and marring fortunes. You did know My sword, made weak by my affection, would Obey it on all cause.","Now I will have to send my humble proposal of peace to that young man. I’ve done as I pleased with half the world, making and losing fortunes, but now I negotiate from a position of weakness. You knew how far you had conquered my spirit. You knew that my sword, weakened by my love for you, would obey that love no matter what."
"Pardon, pardon!",Forgive me! Forgive me!
"Fall not a tear, I say. One of them rates All that is won and lost. Give me a kiss.",Don’t shed even one tear. One of your tears is worth everything that was won and lost. Give me a kiss.
"We sent our schoolmaster. Is he come back?— Love, I am full of lead.—(calling) Some wine, Within there, and our viands! Fortune knows We scorn her most when most she offers blows.","This repays me. I sent our children’s schoolmaster to Caesar with our offer. Has he returned? Love, I am full of heaviness. (calling) Servants, bring some wine and food! We have the most contempt for fortune when it goes against us."
Let him appear that’s come from Antony. Know you him?,Let the envoy from Antony come in. Do you know him?
"Caesar, ’tis his schoolmaster— An argument that he is plucked, when hither He sends so poor a pinion of his wing, Not many moons gone by.","It’s Antony’s schoolmaster. By sending such an insignificant emissary, Antony shows us how low he has sunk. Not so long ago, he had so many royal supporters that he sent along extra kings as messengers."
Approach and speak.,Come forward and speak.
"Such as I am, I come from Antony. I was of late as petty to his ends As is the morn-dew on the myrtle leaf","Humble as I am, I represent Antony. Until recently, I was as unimportant to his affairs as the morning dew is to the wide ocean."
Be ’t so. Declare thine office.,So be it. Say what you’re here for.
"Lord of his fortunes he salutes thee, and Requires to live in Egypt; which not granted, He lessens his requests, and to thee sues To let him breathe between the heavens and earth Next, Cleopatra does confess thy greatness, Submits her to thy might, and of thee craves The circle of the Ptolemies for her heirs, Now hazarded to thy grace.","He acknowledges that you are the master of his fate, and he requests to be allowed to live in Egypt. If that is not granted, he reduces his requests and asks only that he be allowed to live as a private man in Athens. That’s all he asks for himself. Cleopatra recognizes your greatness and accepts your authority. She only asks that the crown of Egypt pass to her heirs, who are now at your mercy."
"For Antony, Of audience nor desire shall fail, so she From Egypt drive her all-disgracèd friend Or take his life there. This if she perform, She shall not sue unheard. So to them both.","As for Antony, I’m not interested in his requests. I’ll give the Queen a hearing and grant her requests if she either throws her dishonored friend out of Egypt or kills him. Then I’ll listen to her. Give my answer to them both."
Fortune pursue thee!,May good luck follow you!
Bring him through the bands.,Take him safely through the lines.
"(to THIDIAS ) To try thy eloquence now ’tis time. Dispatch. From Antony win Cleopatra. Promise, And in our name, what she requires. Add more, From thine invention, offers. Women are not The ne’er-touched vestal. Try thy cunning, Thidias. Make thine own edict for thy pains, which we Will answer as a law.","(to THIDIAS ) Now it’s time to test your eloquence. On your way. Separate Cleopatra from Antony. In my name, promise to fulfill her petitions. You can make up additional offers, if necessary. Women aren’t strong, even at their best. Hardship will make even a vestal virgin priestess vestal abandon her vows. Use your ingenuity, Thidias. You can make your own conditions, which I will authorize as law."
"Caesar, I go.","I go, Caesar."
"Observe how Antony becomes his flaw, In every power that moves.",Observe how Antony takes his defeat and how his attitude influences his actions.
"Caesar, I shall.","I will, Caesar."
"What shall we do, Enobarbus?","What are we going to do, Enobarbus?"
Think and die.,"Think about our situation, then die."
Is Antony or we in fault for this?,Who is to blame for this: Antony or I?
"Antony only, that would make his will Lord of his reason. What though you fled Frighted each other? Why should he follow? The itch of his affection should not then Have nicked his captainship at such a point When half to half the world opposed, he being Than was his loss, to course your flying flags And leave his navy gazing.","Only Antony was at fault. He put his desire in charge of his reason. So what if you ran from the battle, terrified, as ranks of ships threatened one another? Why should he have followed you? With half the world opposing the other half, it wasn’t the time for Antony, the pivotal player, to let love distract him. To race after your departing ships, leaving his navy to watch, was a shame as great as the resulting loss."
"Prithee, peace.","Please, let’s not talk about it."
Is that his answer?,Is that his answer?
"Ay, my lord.","Yes, my lord."
Will yield us up?,The Queen will be treated fairly if she gives me up?
He says so.,That’s what he says.
"Let her know ’t.— (to CLEOPATRA ) To the boy Caesar send this grizzled head, And he will fill thy wishes to the brim With principalities.","Tell her. (to CLEOPATRA ) If you send my aged head to that boy, Caesar, he’ll give you all the kingdoms you want."
"That head, my lord?","Your head, my lord?"
"Of youth upon him, from which the world should note Something particular. His coin, ships, legions, May be a coward’s, whose ministers would prevail Under the service of a child as soon To lay his gay caparisons apart And answer me declined, sword against sword, Ourselves alone. I’ll write it. Follow me.","(to the AMBASSADOR ) Go back to him. Tell him that his cheeks still bear the pink flush of youth, and that the world expects to see something remarkable from him. His treasure, his navy, and his armies might belong to a coward, and his ministers might be able to succeed just as well on behalf of a child as under the command of Caesar. Therefore, I dare him to lay aside his fancy trappings and meet this old man in single combat, sword against sword, just the two of us. I’ll write the challenge. Follow me."
"(aside) Yes, like enough, high-battled Caesar will Against a sworder! I see men’s judgments are A parcel of their fortunes, and things outward Do draw the inward quality after them To suffer all alike. That he should dream, Answer his emptiness! Caesar, thou hast subdued His judgment too.","(aside) Oh, that’s likely! Caesar, the great commander of troops, will surely risk all he has gained in order to fight this gladiator in the public square! I see that men’s judgments are tied to their fortunes, and that external factors influence a man’s internal qualities, making everything suffer. How could Antony, knowing how luck stood on either side, still imagine that Caesar would respond to his nonsense! Caesar, you’ve conquered his judgment too."
A messenger from Caesar.,A messenger has arrived from Caesar.
"What, no more ceremony? See, my women, Against the blown rose may they stop their nose,","With no more ceremony than that? See, ladies, how they scorn me now. They pinch their noses to avoid smelling the dying rose whose scent, as a bud, they happily inhaled. Show him in, sir."
(aside) Mine honesty and I begin to square. The loyalty well held to fools does make Our faith mere folly. Yet he that can endure To follow with allegiance a fall’n lord And earns a place i’ th’ story.,(aside) My integrity and I begin to contradict each other. Being loyal to a fool makes loyalty foolish. But a person who can bear to keep his allegiance to a defeated lord defeats his lord’s conqueror and earns a place in history.
Caesar’s will?,What does Caesar want?
Hear it apart.,It is for your ears only.
None but friends. Say boldly.,There are only friends here. Speak confidently.
So haply are they friends to Antony.,So they are possibly Antony’s friends.
"He needs as many, sir, as Caesar has, Will leap to be his friend. For us, you know Whose he is we are, and that is Caesar’s.","Sir, he should have as many as Caesar has. If he had that many friends, then he wouldn’t need us. If Caesar chose, Antony would jump at the chance to be his friend. As for us, you know we are Antony’s, and he is Caesar’s."
"So.— Thus then, thou most renowned: Caesar entreats Further than he is Caesar.","So be it. This, then, this is the message Caesar sends to you, famous Queen: he implores you not to be concerned about your situation. Just remember that he is Caesar."
Go on. Right royal.,Respectfully put. Go on.
"He knows that you embrace not Antony As you did love, but as you feared him.","He knows that you didn’t embrace Antony because you loved him, but because you feared him."
Oh!,Oh!
The scars upon your honor therefore he Not as deserved.,"So he regrets that any dishonorable acts were forced on you, not being performed of your own free will."
"He is a god and knows What is most right. Mine honor was not yielded, But conquered merely.",He is like a god and knows the truth. My honor wasn’t given; it was only dominated.
"(aside) To be sure of that, I will ask Antony. Sir, sir, thou art so leaky Thy dearest quit thee.","(aside) I’ll go get the truth of this from Antony. Sir, sir, are you so badly off that we must abandon you to your fate? Even your dearest friend has abandoned you."
"Shall I say to Caesar What you require of him? For he partly begs To be desired to give. It much would please him That of his fortunes you should make a staff To hear from me you had left Antony And put yourself under his shroud, The universal landlord.",Shall I tell Caesar what you request from him? He almost begs for the opportunity to help you. It would please him very much if you would rely on his wealth and success to support you. But he would feel even better if I could tell him that you had left Antony and put yourself under his protection.
What’s your name?,What’s your name?
My name is Thidias.,My name is Thidias.
"Most kind messenger, I kiss his conqu’ring hand. Tell him I am prompt To lay my crown at ’s feet, and there to kneel. Tell him, from his all-obeying breath I hear The doom of Egypt.","Most kind messenger, tell great Caesar that through his deputy I kiss his conquering hand. Tell him I am ready to lay my crown at his feet and kneel before him. Tell him—whose decrees are obeyed by the whole world—that I will accept the fate he chooses for Egypt."
"’Tis your noblest course. If that the former dare but what it can, No chance may shake it. Give me grace to lay My duty on your hand.","That’s your most dignified course of action. When confronted with the choice between a prudent action and a risky one, a wise man should dare to do only what he can practically accomplish—if he follows this course, he will never be subjected to unpredictable chance. Allow me to pay my respects by kissing your hand."
"Your Caesar’s father oft, Bestowed his lips on that unworthy place As it rained kisses.","When Octavius Caesar’s father thought about conquering kingdoms, he rained kisses on my unworthy hand."
"Favors? By Jove that thunders! What art thou, fellow?","Promising favors? By Jove that thunders! Who are you, slave?"
"One that but performs The bidding of the fullest man, and worthiest","A person who merely follows the orders of the best man, the man most worthy of service."
You will be whipped.,You will be whipped.
"(calling for servants) Approach, there! (to THIDIAS ) Ah, you kite!—Now, gods and devils! Authority melts from me. Of late, when I cried “Ho!” Like boys unto a muss kings would start forth And cry, “Your will?” (calling to servants) Have you no ears? I am","(calling for servants) Come here! (to THIDIAS ) Ah, you bird of prey! Now by all the gods and devils, my authority weakens. Not long ago, when I cried, “Ho!” kings would jump up and cry, “What’s your pleasure?” (calling to servants) Are you deaf? I’m still Antony."
Take hence this jack and whip him.,Take away this lout and whip him.
(aside) ’Tis better playing with a lion’s whelp Than with an old one dying.,"(aside) It’s safer to toy with a lion cub than an old, dying lion."
"Moon and stars! Whip him. Were ’t twenty of the greatest tributaries That do acknowledge Caesar, should I find them Since she was Cleopatra? Whip him, fellows, Till like a boy, you see him cringe his face And whine aloud for mercy. Take him hence.","By the moon and stars! Whip him! If I saw twenty of the greatest powers that pay tribute to Caesar taking such liberties with her hand—what’s her name now? This woman who once was Cleopatra, but now has become something different? Whip him, fellows, until he screws up his face like a baby and cries aloud for mercy! Take him away."
Mark Antony—,Mark Antony—
"Tug him away! Being whipped, Bear us an errand to him.","Pull him away, and once he has been whipped, bring him back. Caesar’s knave will bring him a message for us."
"(to CLEOPATRA ) You were half blasted ere I knew you. Ha! Have I my pillow left unpressed in Rome, Forborne the getting of a lawful race, By one that looks on feeders?","(to CLEOPATRA ) You were damaged goods before I met you. Ha! Did I desert my bed in Rome, passing up the chance to have a legitimate family with a jewel of a woman, in order to be deceived by one who wastes her favors on servants?"
Good my lord—,My good lord—
"You have been a boggler ever. But when we in our viciousness grow hard— Oh, misery on ’t!—the wise gods seel our eyes, Adore our errors, laugh at ’s while we strut To our confusion.","You’ve always been a liar. But when our vices become habits—Oh, the sadness of it!—the wise gods blind us, shade our better judgment, make us love our mistakes, and laugh as we strut to our ruin."
"Oh, is ’t come to this?","Oh, has it come to this?"
"I found you as a morsel cold upon Dead Caesar’s trencher. Nay, you were a fragment Unregistered in vulgar fame, you have Luxuriously picked out. For I am sure, Though you can guess what temperance should be, You know not what it is.","You were a cold crumb on dead Julius Caesar’s plate when I met you. No, you were one of Gneius Pompey’s leftovers—not to mention your other, more depraved affairs, which have somehow managed to avoid becoming the subject of vulgar gossip. For I’m sure that although you may know what temperance is, you’ve never experienced it firsthand."
Wherefore is this?,Why are you doing this?
"And say “God quit you!” be familiar with My playfellow, your hand, this kingly seal And plighter of high hearts! Oh, that I were Upon the hill of Basan, to outroar And to proclaim it civilly were like A haltered neck which does the hangman thank For being yare about him.","To let a servant be familiar with my little toy, your hand—a hand that has signed royal treaties and pledged your love to me—oh, if only I were standing on the hill of Basan home to herds of bulls (traditional symbols of men with adulterous wives), according to the Bible Basan , so that I could roar louder than that horned herd! For I have been savagely abused, and to state my grievances politely would be as absurd as a condemned criminal thanking the hangman for doing his job quickly."
Is he whipped?,Has he been whipped?
"Soundly, my lord.","Soundly, my lord."
Cried he? And begged he pardon?,Did he cry? Did he beg my pardon?
He did ask favor.,He did ask for mercy.
"(to THIDIAS ) If that thy father live, let him repent Thou wast not made his daughter, and be thou sorry To follow Caesar in his triumph, since The white hand of a lady fever thee; Shake thou to look on ’t. Get thee back to Caesar. Tell him thy entertainment. Look thou say He makes me angry with him, for he seems Not what he knew I was. He makes me angry, And at this time most easy ’tis to do ’t, When my good stars, that were my former guides, Have empty left their orbs and shot their fires My speech and what is done, tell him he has Hipparchus, my enfranchèd bondman, whom He may at pleasure whip, or hang, or torture, As he shall like, to quit me. Urge it thou.","(to THIDIAS ) If your father is alive, let him be sorry you weren’t born a daughter. And you should be sorry to follow Caesar in his triumphal parade, since you have been whipped for following him. From now on, you should tremble and grow feverish whenever you see the white hand of a lady. Get yourself back to Caesar. Tell him how you’ve been treated. Be sure you tell him he makes me angry with him, because he seems proud and disdainful, harping on what I am now rather than what he knows. He makes me angry—and that’s easy to do right now, now that my lucky stars have abandoned me. If he doesn’t like what I’ve said or done, remind him that he holds Hipparchus, a slave I freed. He may whip, or hang, or torture him as he pleases. Then we will be even. Recommend that to him. Take your whipping scars and go."
Have you done yet?,Are you done yet?
"Alack, our terrene moon is now eclipsed, And it portends alone the fall of Antony.","You, my earthly moon, are now eclipsed, and that alone foretells my ruin."
(aside) I must stay his time.,(aside) I must wait for him to finish his tirade.
"To flatter Caesar, would you mingle eyes","In order to flatter Caesar, would you flirt with the servant who laces up his pants?"
Not know me yet?,Don’t you know me still?
Coldhearted toward me?,Has your heart cooled toward me?
"Ah, dear, if I be so, From my cold heart let heaven engender hail, And poison it in the source, and the first stone Drop in my neck. As it determines, so Till by degrees the memory of my womb, Together with my brave Egyptians all, By the discandying of this pelleted storm Lie graveless till the flies and gnats of Nile","Ah, dear, if that is true, let heaven make poisonous hail grow from my heart, and let the first hailstone drop down my throat. As it dissolves, so shall my life. The next hailstone should hit Caesarion, until one by one all my children, and every one of my brave Egyptians, are killed by the dissolving of this pellet storm and lie unburied, covered by gnats and flies."
"I am satisfied. Caesar sits down in Alexandria, where I will oppose his fate. Our force by land Hath nobly held. Our severed navy too Have knit again, and fleet, threat’ning most sealike. If from the field I shall return once more To kiss these lips, I will appear in blood. I and my sword will earn our chronicle. There’s hope in ’t yet.","I am satisfied. Caesar has made camp in Alexandria. I will fight him there. Our land forces have bravely stood firm. Our tattered navy has reassembled and set sail, as formidable as the sea itself. Where have you been, my bravery? Do you hear what I say, lady? If I come back from the battlefield again to kiss those lips, I’ll be covered in blood. My sword and I will earn our place in history. We still have hope."
That’s my brave lord!,That’s my brave lord!
"I will be treble-sinewed, -hearted, -breathed, And fight maliciously. For when mine hours Were nice and lucky, men did ransom lives Of me for jests; but now I’ll set my teeth Let’s have one other gaudy night. Call to me All my sad captains. Fill our bowls once more. Let’s mock the midnight bell.","I’ll be triple the soldier I was in strength, bravery, and stamina. I’ll fight brutally. In the days when I had better luck, prisoners of war could buy their freedoms from me with simple trinkets. But now I’ll grit my teeth and kill anyone who tries to stop me. Come, let’s have one more extravagant night. Invite all my sad captains. Fill our wine bowls again. Let’s drink through midnight."
It is my birthday. I had thought t’ have held it poor; but since my lord,"It’s my birthday. I had planned to celebrate it quietly, but since my lord is once more himself, I will be Cleopatra again."
We will yet do well.,We’ll win yet.
(to ENOBARBUS ) Call all his noble captains to my lord.,(to ENOBARBUS ) Call all my lord’s noble captains to him.
"Do so. We’ll speak to them, and tonight I’ll force The wine peep through their scars.—Come on, my Queen, I’ll make Death love me, for I will contend Even with his pestilent scythe.","Do so. I’ll speak to them, and then tonight I’ll get them all so drunk that the wine seeps out of their old war wounds. Come on, my Queen. There’s still life in our cause. The next time I fight, I’ll make Death love me. I’ll compete even with his fatal scythe."
"Now he’ll outstare the lightning. To be furious Is to be frighted out of fear, and in that mood A diminution in our captain’s brain Restores his heart. When valor preys on reason, It eats the sword it fights with. I will seek Some way to leave him.","Now he’ll work himself up to a fury. Rage scares away a man’s fear. In that state, a dove will attack an ostrich. I have always noticed that when my captain’s reason is diminished, his bravery increases. When courage consumes reason, it destroys its only weapon. I’ll look for some way to leave his service."
"He calls me “boy” and chides as he had power To beat me out of Egypt. My messenger He hath whipped with rods, dares me to personal combat, Caesar to Antony. Let the old ruffian know Laugh at his challenge.","He calls me “boy” and scolds me as if he had the power to whip me out of Egypt. He whipped my messenger with rods. He dares me to personal combat, Caesar against Antony. Let the old ruffian discover that I have many other ways to die, and in the meantime, we’ll laugh at his challenge."
"Caesar must think When one so great begins to rage, he’s hunted Even to falling. Give him no breath, but now Made good guard for itself.","Caesar must realize that when a man as powerful as Antony begins to rage, he has been pursued to the point of collapse. Don’t give him time to catch his breath. Take advantage of his unreasonable rage. Anger does not protect the angry well."
"Let our best heads Know that tomorrow the last of many battles We mean to fight. Within our files there are, Of those that served Mark Antony but late, And feast the army. We have store to do ’t, And they have earned the waste. Poor Antony!","Tell our top commanders that I want tomorrow’s battle to be the last we fight. Our army has recently acquired many of Mark Antony’s former soldiers—enough to capture him. See that it is done, and prepare a feast for the soldiers. We have enough supplies for it, and they’ve earned it. Poor Antony!"
"He will not fight with me, Domitius?","He won’t fight with me, Domitius?"
No.,No.
Why should he not?,Why won’t he?
"He thinks, being twenty times of better fortune, He is twenty men to one.","He thinks that since his fortune is twenty times better than yours, it would be like pitting twenty men against one."
"Tomorrow, soldier, Or bathe my dying honor in the blood Shall make it live again. Woo’t thou fight well?","Tomorrow, soldier, I’ll fight by sea and land. By the end I will either live, or else I’ll restore my honor by shedding my blood. Will you fight well?"
"I’ll strike and cry, “Take all.”","When I strike, I’ll cry, “All or nothing!”"
Well said. Come on! Call forth my household servants.,Well put. Come on. Call out my household servants.
Let’s tonight,Tonight let’s have plenty to eat.
"Give me thy hand. Thou hast been rightly honest.—So hast thou,— Thou,—and thou,—and thou. You have served me well, And kings have been your fellows.","Give me your hand; you’ve been truly honest—so have you and you—and you—you too. You have all served me well, and kings are your peers."
(aside to ENOBARBUS ) What means this?,(aside to ENOBARBUS ) What is this?
Out of the mind.,(aside to CLEOPATRA ) It’s one of those nostalgic moods caused by sorrow.
"(to another SERVITOR ) And thou art honest too. I wish I could be made so many men, And all of you clapped up together in An Antony, that I might do you service","(to another SERVANT ) And you’re honest too. I wish I could split into as many men as there are servants here before me, and that all of you could merge into a single Antony, so I could give you the same good service you’ve given me."
The gods forbid!,The gods forbid!
"Well, my good fellows, wait on me tonight. Scant not my cups, and make as much of me As when mine empire was your fellow too, And suffered my command.","Well, my good fellows, wait on me tonight. Keep my cups full and treat me as you did when my empire was one of your fellow servants, obeying my commands."
(aside to ENOBARBUS ) What does he mean?,(to ENOBARBUS ) Why is he doing this?
(aside to CLEOPATRA ) To make his followers weep.,(to CLEOPATRA ) He wants to make his followers weep.
"(to the SERVITORS ) Tend me tonight. May be it is the period of your duty. Haply you shall not see me more, or if, You’ll serve another master. I look on you As one that takes his leave. Mine honest friends, I turn you not away, but, like a master Married to your good service, stay till death. And the gods yield you for ’t!","(to the SERVANTS ) Wait on me tonight. It’s possible that this will be the end of your service. It’s possible you won’t see me again, or if you do, it will only be my mangled body. Perhaps tomorrow you’ll be serving another master. I look upon you as a person saying good-bye. My honest friends, I won’t turn you away, but like a master dependent on your good service, I will stay with you until death separates us. Serve me tonight for two hours—I don’t ask any more—and may the gods bless you for it."
"What mean you, sir, To give them this discomfort? Look, they weep, And I, an ass, am onion-eyed. For shame, Transform us not to women.","What are you doing, sir? You’re making them uncomfortable. Look—they’re crying. And I’m just foolish enough to tear up myself. It’s embarrassing. Don’t turn us into women."
"Ho, ho, ho! Grace grow where those drops fall! My hearty friends, You take me in too dolorous a sense, For I spake to you for your comfort, did desire you To burn this night with torches. Know, my hearts, Where rather I’ll expect victorious life Than death and honor. Let’s to supper, come, And drown consideration.","Ha, ha, ha! May the evil one take me if I meant it like that! Those tears will bring blessings to you. You interpret my words in a melancholy sense, my hearty friends. I spoke to encourage you, asking that you help me make this night a brilliant one. You should know, my friends, that I have good hopes for tomorrow, and that I will lead you as if I expect victory rather than an honorable death. Let’s go to supper. Come, and let’s drown our worries."
"Brother, good night. Tomorrow is the day.","Good night, brother. Tomorrow is the day."
It will determine one way. Fare you well. Heard you of nothing strange about the streets?,This battle will determine who wins the war. Take care of yourself. Have you heard about anything unusual happening in the city?
Nothing. What news?,No. What was it?
Belike ’tis but a rumor. Good night to you.,It was probably just a rumor. Good night.
"Well, sir, good night.","Well sir, good night."
"Soldiers, have careful watch.","Soldiers, watch carefully."
"And you. Good night, good night.",You too. Good night. Good night.
Here we. And if tomorrow Our landmen will stand up.,"This is our station. And if our navy wins tomorrow, no doubt our army will do their part."
"’Tis a brave army, and full of purpose.",It’s an outstanding army and highly motivated.
Peace! What noise?,Quiet! What’s that sound?
"List, list!",Listen! Listen!
Hark!,Listen!
Music i’ th’ air.,There’s music coming out of thin air.
Under the earth.,From under the earth.
"It signs well, does it not?","It’s a lucky sign, isn’t it?"
No.,No.
"Peace, I say! What should this mean?","Quiet, I say. What does this mean?"
"’Tis the god Hercules, whom Antony loved, Now leaves him.","It means that Antony’s patron god, Hercules Antony’s family claimed to be descended from the demigod Hercules. Antony’s patron god, Hercules , is leaving him."
Walk. Let’s see if other watchmen Do hear what we do.,Let’s walk over and see if the other soldiers heard the same thing.
"How now, masters?","Hello there, good sirs."
(speak together) How now? How now? Do you hear this?,(speaking at the same time) What now? What now? Do you hear that?
Ay. Is ’t not strange?,Yes. Isn’t it strange?
"Do you hear, masters? Do you hear?","Do you hear that, men? Do you?"
Follow the noise so far as we have quarter;,Let’s follow the music as far as we can without leaving our station and see if it stops.
Content. ’Tis strange.,Good idea. It’s very strange.
"(calling) Eros! Mine armor, Eros!","(calling) Eros! Bring my armor, Eros."
Sleep a little.,Get a little sleep.
"No, my chuck.—Eros, come, mine armor, Eros!","No, my dear . . . Eros, come on, bring my armor, Eros."
"Come, good fellow, put thine iron on. If fortune be not ours today, it is","Come on, good fellow, help me into that armor you’re carrying. If luck deserts us today, it’s because we defy it. Come on."
"Nay, I’ll help too. What’s this for?","No, I’ll help too. What’s this part for?"
"Ah, let be, let be! Thou art The armorer of my heart. False, false. This, this.","Ah, leave it alone. Leave it alone! You armor my heart. No! No! That part goes there."
"Sooth, la, I’ll help. Thus it must be.","Really, I’ll help. It must go like this."
"Well, well, We shall thrive now.—Seest thou, my good fellow?","Yes, well done. We’ve got it now.—Do you see this, my good fellow? Go and put on your own armor."
"Briefly, sir.","In a minute, sir."
Is not this buckled well?,Didn’t I buckle this well?
"Rarely, rarely. He that unbuckles this, till we do please To doff ’t for our repose, shall hear a storm.— Thou fumblest, Eros, and my Queen’s a squire That thou couldst see my wars today, and knew’st The royal occupation! Thou shouldst see A workman in ’t.","Excellently, excellently. Anyone who unbuckles this before I want to take it off to rest will be sorry.—You’re fumbling, Eros. My Queen’s a better squire than you are. Hurry.—Oh, love, if you could only watch the battle today and see how expert I am at my craft."
Good morrow to thee. Welcome. Thou look’st like him that knows a warlike charge. And go to ’t with delight.,Good morning to you. Welcome. You look like a person who knows the business of war. When we love our job we get up early and go to it joyfully.
"A thousand, sir, Early though ’t be, have on their riveted trim And at the port expect you.","Even though it’s early, there are already a thousand armored soldiers waiting for you at the harbor."
"The morn is fair. Good morrow, General.","The weather is fair. Good morning, General."
"Good morrow, General.","Good morning, General."
"’Tis well blown, lads. This morning, like the spirit of a youth That means to be of note, begins betimes. So, so. (to CLEOPATRA ) Come, give me that. This way. Well said. Fare thee well, dame.","That was a fine fanfare, boys. Like a young man who wants to amount to something, this morning begins early. (to CLEOPATRA ) So, so. Here, give me that. This is how it goes on. Well done. Farewell, lady."
"Whate’er becomes of me, And worthy shameful check it were to stand On more mechanic compliment. I’ll leave thee Now like a man of steel. (to others) You that will fight, Follow me close. I’ll bring you to ’t. (to CLEOPATRA ) Adieu.","Whatever happens to me, this is a soldier’s kiss. It would be shameful to draw out our good-byes. I’ll leave you without revealing any emotion, like a man of steel. (to the others) Anyone who wants to fight, follow me now, and I’ll see you get your wish. (to CLEOPATRA ) Good-bye."
Please you retire to your chamber?,"If it pleases you, let’s go to your room."
"Lead me. He goes forth gallantly. That he and Caesar might Determine this great war in single fight! Then Antony—but now—. Well, on.","Lead the way. He goes forth to war bravely. If only he and Caesar could determine the outcome of this war by single combat! Then Antony would—but, with circumstances as they are—well, let’s go."
The gods make this a happy day to Antony!,May the gods bless Antony today!
Would thou and those thy scars had once prevailed To make me fight at land!,I wish you and your scarred self had convinced me to wage our last battle on land.
"Hadst thou done so, The kings that have revolted, and the soldier Followed thy heels.","If you had, the kings that have revolted and the soldier that deserted this morning would still be behind you."
Who’s gone this morning?,Who deserted this morning?
"Who? One ever near thee. Call for Enobarbus He shall not hear thee, or from Caesar’s camp Say “I am none of thine.”","You don’t know? Someone who was always near you. If you call for Enobarbus, he won’t hear you. Or if he can hear you from Caesar’s camp, he’ll reply, “I’m no longer on your side.”"
What sayest thou?,What are you saying?
"Sir,","Sir, he’s with Caesar."
"Sir, his chests and treasure He has not with him.","Sir, he left his belongings and treasure."
Is he gone?,He’s gone?
Most certain.,It’s certain.
"Go, Eros, send his treasure after. Do it. Detain no jot, I charge thee. Write to him— I will subscribe—gentle adieus and greetings. To change a master. Oh, my fortunes have Corrupted honest men! Dispatch.—Enobarbus!","Eros, send his treasure to him. Do it now. Don’t keep anything back, I insist. Write to him from me—I’ll sign it—sending greetings and gentle good-byes. Say that I hope he never has cause to look for a new master. Oh, my bad luck has forced honest men to become traitors. Hurry. Enobarbus!"
"Go forth, Agrippa, and begin the fight. Our will is Antony be took alive. Make it so known.","Agrippa, go start the battle. We want Antony taken alive. Make sure everyone knows that."
"Caesar, I shall.","I will, Caesar."
"Prove this a prosp’rous day, the three-nooked world Shall bear the olive freely.","An era of universal peace is about to start. If this battle goes well for us, there will be peace in all three corners of the world Africa, Asia, and Europe, which were all under Roman rule three corners of the world ."
Antony Is come into the field.,Antony has come onto the battlefield.
"Go charge Agrippa Plant those that have revolted in the vant, Upon himself.",Go order Agrippa to put the men who deserted Antony’s army at the front. That way Antony will feel like he’s fighting his own men.
"Alexas did revolt and went to Jewry on Affairs of Antony, there did dissuade Great Herod to incline himself to Caesar Caesar hath hanged him. Canidius and the rest That fell away have entertainment but No honorable trust. I have done ill, Of which I do accuse myself so sorely","Alexas deserted. He went to Judea as if on Antony’s business, but he persuaded Herod to support Caesar instead. Caesar hanged him for this service. Canidius and the others that left Antony are given hospitality here but no positions of trust. I’ve done a bad thing, for which I will blame myself so much that I’ll never be happy again."
"Enobarbus, Antony Hath after thee sent all thy treasure, with His bounty overplus. The messenger Came on my guard, and at thy tent is now Unloading of his mules.","Enobarbus, Antony has sent you all your treasure, with generous gifts besides. The messenger arrived on my watch and is unloading his mules at your tent."
I give it you.,It’s yours.
"Mock not, Enobarbus. I tell you true. Best you safed the bringer Out of the host. I must attend mine office, Or would have done ’t myself. Your Emperor","Don’t joke about this, Enobarbus. I’m telling you the truth. You’d better bring the messenger safely through the lines so he can return. I’d do it myself, but I can’t leave my post. Your Emperor is still a king among gods."
"I am alone the villain of the earth, And feel I am so most. O Antony, Thou mine of bounty, how wouldst thou have paid My better service, when my turpitude If swift thought break it not, a swifter mean Shall outstrike thought, but thought will do ’t, I feel. I fight against thee? No, I will go seek Some ditch wherein to die. The foul’st best fits","I am the worst person alive, and I know it the best. Oh, Antony, you extravagantly generous man, how would you have rewarded me for serving you faithfully when you reward my badness with all of this gold! My heart feels like it’s about to explode. If grief doesn’t kill me, I’ll find a quicker way to kill myself—even though I think grief will do the job just as well. I, fight against you, Antony? No, I’ll go find some ditch to die in. The foulest fate would be most appropriate for me now in this latest phase of my life."
"Retire! We have engaged ourselves too far. Caesar himself has work, and our oppression Exceeds what we expected.",Retreat! We’ve advanced too far. Caesar himself is in trouble and there are more adversaries than we expected.
"O my brave Emperor, this is fought indeed! With clouts about their heads.","Oh, my brave Emperor, this is what I call a fight! If we’d fought like this before, we’d have driven them home with bandaged heads."
Thou bleed’st apace.,You’re bleeding a lot.
"I had a wound here that was like a “T,” But now ’tis made an “H.”",I had a scar here that looked like a “T”; now it’s an “H.”
They do retire.,They’re retreating.
We’ll beat ’em into bench-holes. I have yet,We’ll chase ’em into their latrines. I still have room for six more wounds.
"They are beaten, sir, and our advantage serves For a fair victory.","They’re retreating, sir, and our superiority indicates a clear victory."
"Let us score their backs And snatch ’em up, as we take hares, behind! ’Tis sport to maul a runner.","Let’s slash their backs and grab ’em like we do rabbits, from behind. It’s fair game to mark a coward."
I will reward thee For thy good valor. Come thee on.,I’ll reward you once for your cheerfulness and ten times for your courage. Come on.
I’ll halt after.,I’ll limp after you.
We have beat him to his camp. Run one before And let the Queen know of our gests.,We’ve driven him all the way back to his camp. One of you run to the Queen with the news.
"Tomorrow, Before the sun shall see ’s, we’ll spill the blood That has today escaped. I thank you all, Not as you served the cause, but as ’t had been Each man’s like mine. You have shown all Hectors. Enter the city. Clip your wives, your friends. Tell them your feats, whilst they with joyful tears The honored gashes whole.","Before sunrise tomorrow, we’ll kill anyone who escaped today. I want to thank all of you. You’re formidable. You fought not as if you served the cause but as though it were as much your personal fight as mine. You are all Hectors Hector was a powerful Trojan warrior Hectors . Go on into the city. Embrace your wives and your friends. Describe your feats for them while they cry for joy. Their tears will wash the congealed blood from your wounds, and they will kiss those honorable cuts until they heal."
"(to SCARUS )                Give me thy hand. To this great fairy I’ll commend thy acts, Make her thanks bless thee. O thou day o’ the world, (to CLEOPATRA ) Chain mine armed neck. Leap thou, attire and all, Ride on the pants triumphing!","(to SCARUS ) Give me your hand. I’ll praise your actions to this powerful enchantress so that she will thank you with blessings. Oh, light of the world, (to CLEOPATRA ) wrap your arms around my armored neck. Leap, with all your finery through my armor and go straight to my heart. There you can ride upon my heartbeats, sharing in my triumph."
"Lord of lords! O infinite virtue, com’st thou smiling from The world’s great snare uncaught?",Lord of lords! Your courage is infinite. Have you returned smiling from the great battle for the world?
"Mine nightingale, We have beat them to their beds. What, girl, though gray A brain that nourishes our nerves and can Get goal for goal of youth. Behold this man. Commend unto his lips thy favoring hand. (to SCARUS ) Kiss it, my warrior.","My songbird, we have beaten them to their beds. What do you think, girl! Even though there are some gray hairs among the brown, I still have a brain and muscles that will let me compete with younger men. Look at this man. Show him favor by letting him kiss your hand. (to SCARUS ) Kiss it, my warrior."
He hath fought today Destroyed in such a shape.,Today he fought as though he were a god who hated mankind.
"(to SCARUS )              I’ll give thee, friend, An armor all of gold. It was a king’s.","(to SCARUS ) Friend, I’ll give you armor made of gold. It belonged to a king."
"He has deserved it, were it carbuncled Like holy Phoebus’ car. Give me thy hand. Bear our hacked targets like the men that owe them. Had our great palace the capacity To camp this host, we all would sup together And drink carouses to the next day’s fate, With brazen din blast you the city’s ear; Make mingle with our rattling taborins, That heaven and earth may strike their sounds together, Applauding our approach.","He deserves it, even if it were covered with jewels like holy Phoebus’ car the chariot that the sun god Phoebus drove across the sky Phoebus’ car . Give me your hand. Let’s have a cheerful march through Alexandria, proudly carrying our dented shields. If we had enough room in the palace to house this army, we’d all eat together and toast tomorrow, which promises to be full of danger. Trumpeters, blast the city’s ears. Mix your fanfares with our drums, so that sounds from both heaven and earth will herald our approach."
"If we be not relieved within this hour, We must return to th’ court of guard. The night Is shiny, and they say we shall embattle By th’ second hour i’ th’ morn.","If we aren’t relieved in an hour, we have to return to our barracks. The night is bright, and they say we’ll be forming for battle by two a.m."
This last day was a shrewd one to ’s.,That last day was a hard one for us.
"O bear me witness, night—","Oh, listen to me, night—"
What man is this?,Who is this?
Stand close and list him.,Stay hidden and listen.
"Be witness to me, O thou blessèd moon, Bear hateful memory, poor Enobarbus did Before thy face repent.","Be my witness, oh you blessed moon. The men who revolted against Antony will be remembered scornfully in the history books. But poor Enobarbus repented."
Enobarbus?,That’s Enobarbus?
Peace! Hark further.,Quiet! Keep listening.
"The poisonous damp of night disponge upon me, That life, a very rebel to my will, May hang no longer on me. Throw my heart Against the flint and hardness of my fault, And finish all foul thoughts. O Antony, Nobler than my revolt is infamous, Forgive me in thine own particular, But let the world rank me in register O Antony! O Antony!","Oh, moon, you queen of sadness, drop poisonous dew on me so that my life, which continues against my wishes, will end. Take my heart and throw it against my hard, stony sin. My heart, which dried out with grief, will surely break apart into a powder, and that will be the end of my disgusting mind. Oh, Antony! You are more noble than my revolt is dishonorable. Forgive my crimes against you, but let history record me as a fugitive traitor. Oh, Antony! Oh, Antony!"
Let’s speak to him.,Let’s speak to him.
"Let’s hear him, for the things he speaks may concern Caesar.",Let’s listen to him. He may say something concerning Caesar.
Let’s do so. But he sleeps.,Good idea. But he’s sleeping.
Was never yet for sleep.,It looks more like he fainted. No one ever gave a prayer like that before going to sleep.
Go we to him.,Let’s go to him.
"Awake, sir, awake. Speak to us.","Wake up, sir, wake up. Speak to us."
"Hear you, sir?","Do you hear us, sir?"
The hand of death hath raught him.,The hand of death has taken him.
"Hark, the drums Demurely wake the sleepers. Let us bear him To th’ court of guard. He is of note. Our hour Is fully out.",Listen. The drums softly wake the sleepers. Let’s carry him to the barracks. He’s an important person. Our hour is up.
"Come on, then. He may recover yet.","Come on, then. He may recover yet."
Their preparation is today by sea. We please them not by land.,They’ve switched their operation to the sea today. We didn’t please them on land.
"For both, my lord.","We’re ready for both, my lord."
"I would they’d fight i’ th’ fire or i’ th’ air, We’d fight there too. But this it is: our foot Shall stay with us. Order for sea is given; They have put forth the haven, Where their appointment we may best discover And look on their endeavor.",I wish they’d fight in fire or in the air. We’d meet them there too. But here’s the plan: our army will stay with us on the hills by the city. Orders have been given to the navy and they’ve left port. We’ll be able to analyze and direct the battle better from the hills.
"But being charged, we will be still by land— Which, as I take ’t, we shall, for his best force Is forth to man his galleys. To the vales, And hold our best advantage.","We won’t move our land forces unless we’re attacked. And I doubt that will happen, since most of Antony’s men are with his navy. Let’s take up the best positions we can in the valleys."
Yet they are not joined. Where yond pine does stand I shall discover all. I’ll bring thee word Straight how ’tis like to go.,They still haven’t joined the battle. I’ll be able to see better from that pine tree over there. I’ll let you know right away how it’s going.
"Swallows have built In Cleopatra’s sails their nests. The auguries And dare not speak their knowledge. Antony Is valiant and dejected, and by starts His fretted fortunes give him hope and fear Of what he has and has not.","Swallows have built nests in Cleopatra’s sails. The fortunetellers won’t say whether that’s a good sign or a bad one, but they don’t look happy. Antony is valiant and dejected. His mood changes by fits and starts; his checkered luck vacillates between hope and fear, winning and losing."
"All is lost! My fleet hath yielded to the foe, and yonder They cast their caps up and carouse together Like friends long lost. Triple-turned whore! ’Tis thou Hast sold me to this novice, and my heart For when I am revenged upon my charm, I have done all. Bid them all fly. Begone!","All is lost! This treacherous Egyptian has betrayed me. My fleet has surrendered to the enemy. You can see them over there throwing their hats up in the air and drinking together like long lost friends. Three-time traitor and whore! It’s you who have sold me to this youth, Caesar. Now my war is only with you. Tell the army to flee. Revenge on Cleopatra will be my last act. Order them to escape. Go!"
"O sun, thy uprise shall I see no more. Fortune and Antony part here. Even here That spanieled me at heels, to whom I gave Their wishes, do discandy, melt their sweets On blossoming Caesar, and this pine is barked That overtopped them all. Betrayed I am. Whose eye becked forth my wars and called them home, Whose bosom was my crownet, my chief end, Like a right gypsy hath at fast and loose Beguiled me to the very heart of loss.","Oh, sun, I will never see another one of your sunrises. Luck and Antony separate here and now. Here we’ll shake hands good-bye. Is it all come to this? The brave men who followed me like little dogs, whom I rewarded, have left me to follow Caesar. I’ve been stripped of everything, betrayed. Oh, that devious Egyptian spirit! Her charms launched my wars and called them back again. Pleasing her was my main goal, and she lured me to total defeat. (calling out) Where are you, Eros! Eros!"
"Ah, thou spell! Avaunt!","Ah, you sorceress! Be gone!"
Why is my lord enraged against his love?,Why is my lord enraged against his love?
"Vanish, or I shall give thee thy deserving, And blemish Caesar’s triumph. Let him take thee And hoist thee up to the shouting plebeians! Of all thy sex. Most monsterlike be shown For poor’st diminutives, for dolts, and let Patient Octavia plow thy visage up With her preparèd nails!","Get out of my sight, or I’ll give you what you deserve and spoil Caesar’s victory. Let him hoist you up in front of the shouting crowds! Follow his chariot, like the greatest disgrace to your whole gender. Let them exhibit you to the public for meager coins, like a monstrosity. Then let Octavia dig up your face with her nails."
"’Tis well th’art gone, Thou fell’st into my fury, for one death Might have prevented many.—Eros, ho!— The shirt of Nessus is upon me. Teach me, Alcides, thou mine ancestor, thy rage. And with those hands that grasped the heaviest club Subdue my worthiest self. The witch shall die. To the young Roman boy she hath sold me, and I fall Under this plot. She dies for ’t.—Eros, ho!","If you wish to live, you had better get out of here. But I think it would have been better if you’d let me kill you. One death would have prevented the deaths of many others.—Eros, ho!— I’m wearing the shirt of Nessus. Hercules was killed by a shirt poisoned with Nessus’ blood. Wild with pain, he threw his servant Lichas all the way to the sea. I’m wearing the shirt of Nessus. Hercules, my ancestor, teach me how to feel your rage. I’ll toss Lichas to the moon and use my mighty hands to kill my better self. The witch shall die. She sold me to that young Roman boy and now I’m ruined. She’ll die for it.—Eros, ho!"
"Help me, my women! Oh, he’s more mad Than Telamon for his shield. The boar of Thessaly Was never so embossed.","Help me, ladies! Oh, Antony is more furious than Telamon, who killed himself in a jealous rage. The wild boar of Thessaly, which the goddess Diana sent to punish King Caledon for neglecting her sacrifices, didn’t foam at the mouth as much as Antony does now."
To th’ monument! There lock yourself and send him word you are dead. Than greatness going off.,"Go to your tomb! Lock yourself in and send him word that you’re dead. When a great person departs, it causes more pain than when the soul leaves the body."
"To th’ monument!— Mardian, go tell him I have slain myself. Say that the last I spoke was “Antony,” And word it, prithee, piteously. Hence, Mardian,","To my tomb! Mardian, go tell him I’ve killed myself. Say the last word I spoke was “Antony,” and please word it pathetically. Go, Mardian, and let me know how he reacts to my death. (to the others) To the tomb!"
"Eros, thou yet behold’st me?","Eros, can you still see me?"
"Ay, noble lord.","Yes, noble lord."
"Sometimes we see a cloud that’s dragonish, A vapor sometime like a bear or lion, A towered citadel, a pendant rock, With trees upon ’t that nod unto the world And mock our eyes with air. Thou hast seen these signs. They are black vesper’s pageants.","Sometimes we see a cloud that looks like a dragon. Sometimes there’s a cloud like a bear or a lion, a castle, a floating rock, a craggy mountain. Or it might look like a blue cliff with trees on it that bow to the ground. These things fool our eyes by seeming solid, when they are actually only air. You’ve seen these illusions. They’re spectacles that appear at sunset."
"Ay, my lord.","Yes, my lord."
"That which is now a horse, even with a thought As water is in water.","What looks like a horse is quick as thought disfigured by the wind, made as difficult to distinguish as water poured into water."
"It does, my lord.","That’s true, my lord."
"My good knave Eros, now thy captain is Even such a body. Here I am Antony, Yet cannot hold this visible shape, my knave. Whose heart I thought I had, for she had mine— Which whilst it was mine had annexed unto ’t A million more, now lost—she, Eros, has Packed cards with Caesar and false-played my glory Nay, weep not, gentle Eros. There is left us Ourselves to end ourselves.","Eros, my young friend, your captain is now just like that cloud. Here and now I seem like Antony, but I can’t keep myself in this form, my boy. I went to war to save Cleopatra, whose love I thought I had, since she had mine—and mine carried with it a million others, those of my soldiers, now lost. The Queen conspired with Caesar to undermine my success and assure his victory. No, don’t cry, kind Eros. We still have the option of killing ourselves."
"Oh, thy vile lady! She has robbed me of my sword.","Oh, your contemptible lady! She has disarmed me."
"No, Antony, My mistress loved thee, and her fortunes mingled","No, Antony. My mistress loved you, and her destiny was completely joined with yours."
"Hence, saucy eunuch! Peace! She hath betrayed me and shall die the death.","Get out, insolent eunuch! Silence! She has betrayed me and shall die."
"Death of one person can be paid but once, And that she has discharged. What thou wouldst do Is done unto thy hand. The last she spake Then in the midst a tearing groan did break The name of Antony. It was divided Between her heart and lips. She rendered life, Thy name so buried in her.","A person can only pay with their life once, and she has paid in full. What you wanted is yours. Her last words were “Antony! Most noble Antony!” Then, as she was speaking your name, a strangled groan split her words. “Antony” was divided between her heart and lips. She gave up her life with your name still within her."
"Dead, then?","Is she dead, then?"
Dead.,Dead.
And we must sleep. (to MARDIAN ) That thou depart’st hence safe Does pay thy labor richly. Go.,"Remove your armor, Eros. The long day’s work is over, and it is time to sleep. (to MARDIAN ) Permission to leave unharmed is abundant payment for your news. Go!"
"Off, pluck off! The sevenfold shield of Ajax cannot keep The battery from my heart. O, cleave, my sides! Crack thy frail case!—Apace, Eros, apace. No more a soldier. Bruisèd pieces, go. You have been nobly borne. (to EROS ) From me awhile.","Off! Take off my armor. Not even Ajax’s famous shield, made of seven layers of oxhide and covered in bronze, could protect my heart from this attack. Oh, chest, obey me! Heart, for once be stronger than all the rest of the body combined. Break out of my ribcage! Faster, Eros, faster. I won’t be a soldier anymore. Battered armor, be off. You were worn with honor. (to EROS ) Leave me awhile."
"I will o’ertake thee, Cleopatra, and All length is torture. Since the torch is out, Lie down and stray no farther. Now all labor Mars what it does. Yea, very force entangles Itself with strength. Seal then, and all is done.— Where souls do couch on flowers, we’ll hand in hand, And with our sprightly port make the ghosts gaze. Dido and her Aeneas shall want troops, And all the haunt be ours.—Come, Eros, Eros!","I will catch up with you, Cleopatra, and weep for your forgiveness. It’s the only way left, because now any extension of my life would be torture. Since the light of my life has gone out, I’ll stop here. Now any effort ruins what it attempts. Yes, even power gets in its own way. End it, then, and everything is over.—Eros!—I’m coming, my Queen!—Eros!—Wait for me. In the place where souls recline on beds of flowers we’ll walk hand in hand and amaze the other ghosts with our spirited demeanor. Those famous lovers, Dido and Aeneas, will lose their admirers, and the whole place will be devoted to us.—Come, Eros. Eros!"
What would my lord?,What can I do for my lord?
"Since Cleopatra died I have lived in such dishonor that the gods Detest my baseness. I, that with my sword Quartered the world, and o’er green Neptune’s back With ships made cities, condemn myself to lack Than she which by her death our Caesar tells “I am conqueror of myself.” Thou art sworn, Eros, That when the exigent should come which now Is come indeed, when I should see behind me Disgrace and horror, that on my command, Thou then wouldst kill me. Do ’t. The time is come. Thou strik’st not me, ’tis Caesar thou defeat’st. Put color in thy cheek.","Since Cleopatra died, I have lived in such dishonor that the gods despise my disgrace. Though I have made conquests throughout the four corners of the world and sailed with fleets so large they looked like floating cities, I don’t have as much courage as a woman. I have less nobility than the lady who, by killing herself, says to Caesar, “Only Cleopatra can defeat Cleopatra.” You promised me, Eros, that should the ultimate moment arrive—which it has—when dishonor and disgust are inevitable, that upon my command, you would kill me. Do it. This is that time. You won’t be striking me down, but defeating Caesar. Call up your courage."
"The gods withhold me! Though enemy, lost aim and could not?","The gods forbid! Can I do what all the Parthian arrows, though shot by enemies, could not?"
"Eros, Wouldst thou be windowed in great Rome and see Thy master thus with pleached arms, bending down His corrigible neck, his face subdued Of fortunate Caesar, drawn before him, branded His baseness that ensued?","Eros, would you like to look through a window in Rome and watch your master marching in Caesar’s victory parade, his arms crossed and tied, his head bowed in submission, his face red from shame, while the chariot of triumphant Caesar precedes him, putting the final stamp to his humiliation?"
I would not see ’t.,I would not.
"Come, then, for with a wound I must be cured. Draw that thy honest sword, which thou hast worn","Then come on. I must be restored to health by an injury. Draw your trustworthy sword, which you have used in such service to your country."
"O sir, pardon me!","Oh, sir, pardon me!"
"When I did make thee free, swor’st thou not then To do this when I bade thee? Do it at once, Or thy precedent services are all But accidents unpurposed. Draw and come.","When I freed you from slavery, didn’t you swear to do this when I asked you? Do it immediately, or all your previous services to me were accidental, without purpose. Take out your sword and come on."
Wherein the worship of the whole world lies.,"Then turn your noble face away from me, that face that the whole world adores."
Lo thee!,Look!
My sword is drawn.,I have drawn my sword.
Then let it do at once The thing why thou hast drawn it.,Now let it carry out its purpose immediately.
"My dear master, Before I strike this bloody stroke, farewell.","My dear master, my captain, my sovereign, let me say before I strike this fatal blow: farewell."
"’Tis said, man, and farewell.","You’ve said it, friend, and farewell to you."
"Farewell, great chief. Shall I strike now?","Good-bye, great commander. Should I do it now?"
"Now, Eros.","Now, Eros."
"Why, there then!","Well, then, there!"
Thus I do escape the sorrow,With this I avoid the grief of Antony’s death.
"Thrice nobler than myself, Thou teachest me, O valiant Eros, what I should and thou couldst not. My Queen and Eros Have by their brave instruction got upon me A nobleness in record. But I will be As to a lover’s bed. Come then, and Eros, Thy master dies thy scholar. To do thus I learned of thee.","Brave Eros, three times more honorable than I am! You teach me what I should do but could not. My Queen and Eros have by their brave examples beaten me to the history books. But I will embrace death as a bridegroom does his bride, and rush to it as to a lover’s bed. Come then. Eros, your master dies your student. I learned to do this from you."
"How! Not dead? Not dead? The guard, ho! Oh, dispatch me!","What! I’m not dead? Not dead?—Guard, here! Oh, kill me!"
What’s the noise?,What’s the trouble?
"I have done my work ill, friends. Oh, make an end Of what I have begun!","I’ve botched the job, friends. Oh, finish what I’ve begun."
The star is fall’n.,Our guiding light is out.
And time is at his period.,And time itself is ended.
"Alas, and woe!",Sadness and despair!
Let him that loves me strike me dead.,Whoever’s a real friend should strike me dead.
Not I.,Not me.
Nor I.,Me neither.
Nor anyone.,None of us.
Thy death and fortunes bid thy followers fly.,Your death and destiny advise your followers to escape.
"This sword but shown to Caesar, with this tidings,",I only need to show your sword to Caesar and tell him about your death to get into his good favor.
Where’s Antony?,Where’s Antony?
"There, Diomed, there.","There, Diomedes, there."
"Lives he? Wilt thou not answer, man?","Is he still alive? Why don’t you answer me, man?"
"Art thou there, Diomed? Draw thy sword and give me","Is that you, Diomedes? Draw your sword and give me enough blows to kill me."
"Most absolute lord, My mistress Cleopatra sent me to thee.","Most powerful lord, my mistress Cleopatra sent me to you."
When did she send thee?,When did she send you?
"Now, my lord.","Just now, my lord."
Where is she?,Where is she?
"Locked in her monument. She had a prophesying fear Of what hath come to pass. For when she saw— She had disposed with Caesar, and that your rage Would not be purged, she sent you word she was dead. But fearing since how it might work, hath sent Me to proclaim the truth, and I am come,","Locked in her tomb. She had a premonition of what has actually happened. She saw that you suspected her of negotiating a treaty with Caesar—which never will be true. Afraid that your anger would not subside, she sent you word she was dead. But later, fearing how that news might affect you, she sent me to tell you the truth. I’m afraid I’ve come too late."
"Too late, good Diomed. Call my guard, I prithee.","Too late, good Diomedes. Call my guard, please."
"What ho, the Emperor’s guard! The guard, what ho! Come, your lord calls!","Hey out there! Emperor’s guards! Guards, hey! Come! Your lord calls for you!"
"Bear me, good friends, where Cleopatra bides.","Carry me, good friends, to where Cleopatra is. It’s the last command I shall ever give you."
"Woe, woe are we, sir, you may not live to wear All your true followers out.","We’re very sorry, sir, that you may not live to wear us out with your commands."
Most heavy day!,It’s a very sad day.
"Nay, good my fellows, do not please sharp fate To grace it with your sorrows. Bid that welcome Seeming to bear it lightly. Take me up. I have led you oft; carry me now, good friends, And have my thanks for all.","No, my friends, don’t please fate by giving it your sorrow as well. If we welcome our punishment, we punish it right back by seeming to take it lightly. Pick me up. I have often led you, now you must carry me, my good friends—and take my thanks for everything."
"O Charmian, I will never go from hence.","Oh, Charmian, I will never leave this tomb!"
"Be comforted, dear madam.","Be calm, dear lady."
"No, I will not. All strange and terrible events are welcome, But comforts we despise. Our size of sorrow, As that which makes it.","No, I won’t. Strange and terrible events are all welcome, but I despise comforts. The size of my sorrow must be as great as its source."
How now? Is he dead?,What’s the news! Is he dead?
"His death’s upon him, but not dead. Look out o’ th’ other side your monument. His guard have brought him thither.","He is close to death, but not dead yet. Look out the other window; his guard has brought him here."
"O sun, The varying shore o’ th’ world! O Antony, Antony, Antony! Help, Charmian, help, Iras, help! Help, friends below! Let’s draw him hither.","Oh, sun, burn up the orbit in which you move, so that the world may be dark forever! Oh, Antony, Antony, Antony! Help, Charmian, help, Iras, help! Help, friends below; lift him up here."
"Peace! Not Caesar’s valor hath o’erthrown Antony,",Be calm! It was not Caesar’s bravery that conquered Antony but Antony’s that has triumphed over himself.
"So it should be, that none but Antony Should conquer Antony, but woe ’tis so!",That’s the way it should be—only Antony should conquer Antony. But how terrible that it has happened!
"I am dying, Egypt, dying. Only I here importune death awhile, until I lay upon thy lips.","I am dying, Cleopatra, dying. I just beg death to wait awhile, until I place the last of our many thousands of kisses on your lips."
"I dare not, dear, Dear my lord, pardon, I dare not, Lest I be taken. Not th’ imperious show Of the full-fortuned Caesar ever shall Edge, sting, or operation, I am safe. Your wife Octavia, with her modest eyes And still conclusion, shall acquire no honor Demuring upon me. But come, come, Antony— Assist, good friends.","I don’t dare come down—forgive me, my lord—I don’t dare, for fear of capture. I will never be exhibited as lucky Caesar’s prize. If knives, poison, or snakes have edge, effect, or venom, I am safe from that fate. Your wife Octavia, with her self-effacing eyes and self-righteous assumptions, won’t get any praise from patronizing me. But come. Come up here, Antony—help me, ladies—we must carry you up. Help us, good friends."
"Oh, quick, or I am gone.","Oh, quick, before I’m gone."
"Here’s sport indeed! How heavy weighs my lord! Our strength is all gone into heaviness, That makes the weight. Had I great Juno’s power, And set thee by Jove’s side. Yet come a little. Wishers were ever fools. Oh, come, come, come!","Such exercise! My lord is so heavy! Our strength has all turned into sadness. That’s what makes the weight. If I had the goddess Juno’s power, I would make the strong-winged messenger, Mercury, pick you up and seat you beside Jove. Up just a little more—wishes are always foolish—oh, come on, come on, come on!"
"And welcome, welcome! Die when thou hast lived. Quicken with kissing. Had my lips that power,","And welcome, welcome! Die where you have lived, in my arms. Let me revive you with my kisses. If my lips had the power to give life, I would wear them out like this."
A heavy sight!,What a sad sight!
"I am dying, Egypt, dying. Give me some wine and let me speak a little.","I am dying, Cleopatra, dying. Give me some wine and let me say a few words."
"No, let me speak, and let me rail so high Provoked by my offense.","No, let me talk, and let me scold to the heavens, so that Fortune, that deceitful hussy, will become so upset that she breaks her wheel. Fortune was often depicted as a woman with a wheel, which controlled human beings’ fates. Fortune, that deceitful hussy, will become so upset that she breaks her wheel."
"One word, sweet Queen: Of Caesar seek your honor, with your safety—Oh!","One thing, dear Queen: request honor, as well as safety, from Caesar. Oh!"
They do not go together.,Honor and safety do not go together.
"Gentle, hear me. None about Caesar trust but Proculeius.","Dear, listen to me: don’t trust any of Caesar’s men besides Proculeius."
None about Caesar.,"I’ll trust my determination and my hands, but none of Caesar’s men."
"The miserable change now at my end Lament nor sorrow at, but please your thoughts In feeding them with those my former fortunes, The noblest, and do now not basely die, Not cowardly put off my helmet to My countryman—a Roman by a Roman Valiantly vanquished. Now my spirit is going.","Don’t mourn over this unhappy reversal of fortune at the end of my life. Remember my earlier lot, when I lived as the greatest, most noble prince in the world. I’m not dying shamefully, doffing my helmet to my countryman like a coward, but as a Roman, honorably conquered by another Roman. Now I feel my soul leaving. I can’t speak any more."
"Noblest of men, woo’t die? Hast thou no care of me? Shall I abide In this dull world, which in thy absence is No better than a sty? O see, my women, The crown o’ th’ earth doth melt. My lord!","Most noble man, will you die? Don’t you care about me? Shall I stay in this dreary world, which is no better than a pigsty without you? Oh, look, ladies. The best of the world disappears. My lord!"
"The soldier’s pole is fall’n! Young boys and girls Are level now with men. The odds is gone, And there is nothing left remarkable Beneath the visiting moon.","Oh, the glory of war has faded. The flags have fallen. Young boys and girls are equal to men. There is nothing distinctive, nothing remarkable left in the world."
"Oh, quietness, lady!","Oh, stay calm, lady!"
"She’s dead too, our sovereign.",Our Queen is dead too.
Lady!,Lady!
Madam!,Madam!
"O madam, madam, madam!","Oh, madam, madam, madam!"
"Royal Egypt, Empress!","Royal Egypt, Empress!"
"Peace, peace, Iras.","Quiet, quiet, Iras."
"No more but e’en a woman, and commanded By such poor passion as the maid that milks And does the meanest chares. It were for me To throw my scepter at the injurious gods, Till they had stolen our jewel. All’s but naught. Patience is sottish, and impatience does Become a dog that’s mad. Then is it sin To rush into the secret house of death What, what, good cheer! Why, how now, Charmian? My noble girls! Ah, women, women! Look, Our lamp is spent, it’s out. Good sirs, take heart. We’ll bury him, and then, what’s brave, what’s noble, And make death proud to take us. Come, away. This case of that huge spirit now is cold. Ah, women, women! Come. We have no friend But resolution, and the briefest end.","Now I am no more than a woman, ruled by the same lowly passion as the maid who milks and does the humblest chores. I might now hurl my scepter at the destructive gods and tell them that this earthly world was as good as their heavenly one, until they stole away its jewel, Antony. Now all is for nothing. Patience is foolish. Impatience suits a mad dog. So why should it be a sin to rush toward death, to seek it out in its hiding place before it dares to come to find me? How are you, my ladies? Tell me! Cheer up! How are you, Charmian? My gallant girls! Ah, ladies, look: the light of our lives has gone out. Good noble ladies, be brave. We’ll bury him, and then we’ll commit acts as brave and fine as any Romans, and make death proud to take us. Come on, you can go. The container of that great soul is now cold. Ah, ladies, ladies! Let’s go. We have no friends but determination and the quickest death."
"Go to him, Dolabella, bid him yield. Being so frustrate, tell him, he mocks The pauses that he makes.","Dolabella, go see Antony. Tell him to surrender. His position is hopeless. This delay makes him look ridiculous."
"Caesar, I shall.","Right away, Caesar."
Wherefore is that? And what art thou that dar’st,What are you doing with a sword? Who do you think you are coming in here armed?
"I am called Dercetus. Mark Antony I served, who best was worthy Best to be served. Whilst he stood up and spoke, He was my master, and I wore my life To spend upon his haters. If thou please I’ll be to Caesar. If thou pleasest not, I yield thee up my life.","My name is Decretus. I served Mark Antony, who was the commander most worthy of my services. While he was alive, I lived only to serve him and oppose his enemies. If you accept my service, I’ll serve you the same way. If not, you can kill me."
What is ’t thou say’st?,What are you saying?
"I say, O Caesar, Antony is dead.","Caesar, I’m telling you that Antony is dead."
The breaking of so great a thing should make Should have shook lions into civil streets And citizens to their dens. The death of Antony Is not a single doom. In the name lay A moiety of the world.,"When such a great man dies there should be a thunderclap. The fractured world, in its confusion, should send lions into the city streets and humans into the wilderness to live in lions’ dens. This isn’t the death of one man. It’s the death of half the world."
"He is dead, Caesar, Nor by a hirèd knife, but that self hand Which writ his honor in the acts it did Hath, with the courage which the heart did lend it, Splitted the heart. This is his sword. With his most noble blood.","He’s dead, Caesar. Not by public execution or an assassin’s knife. He killed himself with the same hand that performed such brave acts. With the courage his heart lent his hand, his hand in turn split his heart. This is his sword. I pulled it from his wound. Look—his noble blood is still on it."
"Look you, sad friends, The gods rebuke me, but it is tidings To wash the eyes of kings.","Listen, sad friends, though the gods may rebuke me, this news would make kings cry."
And strange it is That nature must compel us to lament,It’s strange that human nature makes us grieve for the very thing we’ve been trying to achieve.
His taints and honors Waged equal with him.,His faults were equally matched by his virtues.
"A rarer spirit never Did steer humanity, but you gods will give us Some faults to make us men. Caesar is touched.","There was never a ruler as excellent as he. But gods, you give us faults so we’ll be human. Caesar is upset."
"When such a spacious mirror’s set before him,",It’s impossible for him not to see himself in Antony.
"O Antony, I have followed thee to this, but we do launch Diseases in our bodies. I must perforce Have shown to thee such a declining day, Or look on thine. We could not stall together With tears as sovereign as the blood of hearts That thou, my brother, my competitor In top of all design, my mate in empire, Friend and companion in the front of war, Where mine his thoughts did kindle—that our stars, Unreconcilable, should divide Our equalness to this. Hear me, good friends—","Oh, Antony. I drove you to this. But we have to get rid of a disease if it threatens our body. Either I had to ruin you, or you would have ruined me. There wasn’t enough room in the world for both of us. Even so, let me mourn, with tears that heal like a bloodletting, that you—my brother, my greatest competitor, my partner in rule, my friend and companion on the battlefield, the very arm of my body, and the heart in which mine own heart’s thoughts lived—that our fates could not be reconciled, which caused us to divide ourselves from one another. Let me tell you, friends—"
But I will tell you at some meeter season. We’ll hear him what he says. (to EGYPTIAN ) Whence are you?,I’ll tell you at a better time. This man looks like his business is urgent. Let’s hear what he has to say. (to EGYPTIAN ) Who are you?
"A poor Egyptian yet, the Queen my mistress, Confined in all she has, her monument, Of thy intents desires instruction, To th’ way she’s forced to.","A poor Egyptian, but my mistress, the Queen, sent me to find out what your intentions are concerning her. She’s locked up in her tomb and wants to prepare herself for her fate."
"Bid her have good heart. She soon shall know of us, by some of ours, How honorable and how kindly we Determine for her, for Caesar cannot live",Tell her to put her mind at rest. She’ll find out soon enough by one of our messengers how respectfully and kindly we plan to treat her. I cannot be taught how to be cruel.
So the gods preserve thee!,May the gods bless you.
"Come hither, Proculeius. Go and say We purpose her no shame. Give her what comforts The quality of her passion shall require, Lest, in her greatness, by some mortal stroke Would be eternal in our triumph. Go, And with your speediest bring us what she says And how you find of her.","Come here, Proculeius. Tell her we mean her no disrespect. Give her whatever assurances you feel she needs to keep her from killing herself. I need her alive, so that I can exhibit her in my triumphal procession and gain eternal fame. Go, and hurry back to bring us her reply and news of her state of mind."
"Caesar, I shall.","I will, Caesar."
"Gallus, go you along.","Gallus, you go with him."
"Where’s Dolabella,",Where’s Dolabella? He’s supposed to support Proculeius.
Dolabella!,Dolabella!
"Let him alone, for I remember now How he’s employed. He shall in time be ready. Go with me to my tent, where you shall see How hardly I was drawn into this war, In all my writings. Go with me and see What I can show in this.",Never mind. I remember he’s already occupied. He’ll be done in time. Come with me. In my tent I’ll show you how unwillingly I was drawn into this war. You’ll see how calm and gentle my letters to Antony always were. Come and see the proof.
"My desolation does begin to make A better life. ’Tis paltry to be Caesar. Not being Fortune, he’s but Fortune’s knave, A minister of her will. And it is great Which shackles accidents and bolts up change, Which sleeps and never palates more the dung, The beggar’s nurse, and Caesar’s.","Being alone has helped me better understand my life. It’s pathetic to be Caesar. He can’t be Fortune; he’s only Fortune’s errand boy. It would be a great deed to commit suicide—that act which ends all other things, which makes all accidents and changes stop. Which causes you to sleep, and takes you away from earthly concerns."
"Caesar sends greeting to the Queen of Egypt, Thou mean’st to have him grant thee.",Caesar greets the Queen of Egypt and asks that you consider what you will ask from him.
What’s thy name?,What’s your name?
My name is Proculeius.,My name is Proculeius.
"Antony Did tell me of you, bade me trust you, but I do not greatly care to be deceived, Would have a queen his beggar, you must tell him, That majesty, to keep decorum, must No less beg than a kingdom. If he please To give me conquered Egypt for my son, Will kneel to him with thanks.","Antony told me about you. He said you were a man I could trust. But I don’t worry about being deceived because I don’t need to trust. If your master wants a queen to beg from him, you should tell him that a queen will beg for no less than a kingdom. If he will grant me conquered Egypt, so that I may give it to my son, I will kneel to him with thanks."
"Be of good cheer. You’re fall’n into a princely hand. Fear nothing. Make your full reference freely to my lord, Who is so full of grace that it flows over Your sweet dependency, and you shall find A conqueror that will pray in aid for kindness Where he for grace is kneeled to.","Be content. You’re in the charge of an honorable man. Don’t be afraid. You can ask for anything from my lord. His generosity flows to anyone in need. If I can tell him that you have submitted to him sweetly, he’ll request your assistance in finding ways in which he can support you."
"Pray you, tell him I am his fortune’s vassal, and I send him A doctrine of obedience, and would gladly Look him i’ th’ face.",Please tell him I have surrendered to his fortune. I give up to him the glory he has won. I’m learning every hour how to be subservient. I’d be happy to meet with him in person.
"This I’ll report, dear lady. Have comfort, for I know your plight is pitied Of him that caused it.","I’ll tell him all of this, dear lady. Be at ease. I know he’s sorry for your situation, especially since he caused it."
(to the soldiers) Guard her till Caesar come.,(to PROCULEIUS ) See how easy it was to capture her? (to soldiers) Guard her until Caesar arrives.
Royal Queen!,Your majesty!
"O Cleopatra! Thou art taken, Queen.","Oh, Cleopatra! You’ve been betrayed, my Queen!"
"Quick, quick, good hands.","Quick, quick good hands!"
"Hold, worthy lady, hold! Do not yourself such wrong, who are in this","Stop, brave lady, stop! Don’t do such a shameful thing to yourself. We’ve rescued you from yourself. We have not betrayed you."
"What, of death too, That rids our dogs of languish?","What, am I being denied death, as well? The thing which even dogs are given, to rid them of their suffering?"
"Cleopatra, Do not abuse my master’s bounty by Th’ undoing of yourself. Let the world see His nobleness well acted, which your death",Don’t insult my master’s generosity by killing yourself. The world will see how noble he is by the way he treats you. Your death would prevent that.
"Where art thou, Death? Come hither, come! Come, come and take a queen Worth many babes and beggars!","Where are you, Death? Come here. Come, and you can have a queen. One queen is worth more than a whole number of babies and beggars, your cheapest conquests."
"Oh, temperance, lady!","Oh, control yourself, lady!"
"Sir, I will eat no meat, I’ll not drink, sir. If idle talk will once be necessary, Do Caesar what he can. Know, sir, that I Will not wait pinioned at your master’s court, Nor once be chastised with the sober eye Of dull Octavia. Shall they hoist me up Of censuring Rome? Rather a ditch in Egypt Be gentle grave unto me. Rather on Nilus’ mud Lay me stark naked and let the waterflies Blow me into abhorring. Rather make And hang me up in chains!","Sir, I won’t eat. I won’t drink. And don’t expect me to talk. I won’t sleep either. I’ll destroy my body. Let Caesar do whatever he wants. You’d better understand that I won’t wait till I’m chained up in your master’s court, and I won’t let myself be scolded even once by dull Octavia. Shall I let them exhibit me to the shouting mobs of Rome? I’d rather die in a ditch in Egypt, and make it my gentle grave. I’d rather lie in the Nile mud with flies laying their eggs in me, making me disgusting. I’d rather be hung in chains from one of our pyramids!"
You do extend These thoughts of horror further than you shall Find cause in Caesar.,You’re letting yourself get carried away with these horrible thoughts. You’ll see that Caesar is giving you no reason to do so.
"Proculeius, What thou hast done thy master Caesar knows, I’ll take her to my guard.","Proculeius, Caesar has heard about what you’ve done here and has sent for you. I’ll take the Queen into my custody."
"So, Dolabella, It shall content me best. Be gentle to her. (to CLEOPATRA ) To Caesar I will speak what you shall please, If you’ll employ me to him.","So be it, Dolabella. Caesar’s thanks are my greatest reward. Be kind to her. (to CLEOPATRA ) I’ll relay to Caesar any request you want to give me."
Say I would die.,Tell him I’d like to die.
"Most noble Empress, you have heard of me?","Have you heard of me, most noble Empress?"
I cannot tell.,I don’t remember.
Assuredly you know me.,I’m sure you’ve heard of me.
"No matter, sir, what I have heard or known. You laugh when boys or women tell their dreams.",It doesn’t matter what I’ve heard or known. You must be the one who laughs when boys or women tell you their dreams. Isn’t that your habit?
"I understand not, madam.","I don’t know what you mean, madam."
"I dreamt there was an emperor Antony. Oh, such another sleep, that I might see But such another man!","I dreamed about an emperor called Antony. Oh, I wish I could sleep again, so I could have another dream like that!"
If it might please ye—,If you’d like—
"His face was as the heavens, and therein stuck The little “O,” the earth.","Authority radiated from his face, and his presence brought knowledge and order to the people of earth."
Most sovereign creature—,Your majesty—
"His legs bestrid the ocean. His reared arm Crested the world. His voice was propertied As all the tunèd spheres, and that to friends. He was as rattling thunder. For his bounty, There was no winter in ’t, an autumn ’twas That grew the more by reaping. His delights Were dolphinlike; they showed his back above Walked crowns and crownets. Realms and islands were As plates dropped from his pocket.","His power extended from one shore to the other, as if he straddled the ocean with his legs. When he raised his arm in command, the world trembled. He spoke exquisitely to his friends, but when he wanted to terrify the world, his voice was like thunder. There was no end to his generosity. The more he gave, the more he wanted to give. His amusements showed another side of him, one detached from his world of responsibility and duty. Kings and noblemen served him. Kingdoms and provinces dropped from his pockets like loose change."
Cleopatra—,Cleopatra—
Think you there was or might be such a man As this I dreamt of?,"Do you think there ever was, or could there ever be, a man such as the one I dreamed about?"
"Gentle madam, no.","No, gentle madam."
"But if there be nor ever were one such, It’s past the size of dreaming. Nature wants stuff To vie strange forms with fancy, yet t’ imagine An Antony were nature’s piece ’gainst fancy,","The gods can hear you lying! But if there ever were such a man, simple dreams could never contain his greatness. When it comes to creating fantastical things, the natural world cannot compete with imagination. And yet, if the natural world could create something like Antony, it would have a masterpiece to rival anything fantasy might construct. Antony would easily outshine all imaginary beings."
"Hear me, good madam. Your loss is as yourself, great, and you bear it As answering to the weight. Would I might never O’ertake pursued success, but I do feel, By the rebound of yours, a grief that smites","Listen to me, madam. You are a remarkable person and your loss is equally remarkable. You are responding appropriately to the greatness of that loss. I hope I never achieve success if I don’t feel some of your heartbroken grief right now."
"I thank you, sir. Know you what Caesar means to do with me?","Thank you, sir. Do you know what Caesar intends to do with me?"
I am loath to tell you what I would you knew.,I’m reluctant to tell you what I wish you knew.
"Nay, pray you, sir.","Please, sir—"
Though he be honorable—,Though he is honorable—
"He’ll lead me, then, in triumph.",He’ll still parade me through Rome as a trophy of war.
"Madam, he will. I know ’t.","I know he will, madam."
Make way there! Caesar!,Stand aside for Caesar.
Which is the Queen of Egypt?,Which of these ladies is the Queen of Egypt?
"(to CLEOPATRA ) It is the Emperor, madam.","(to CLEOPATRA ) It’s the Emperor, madam."
"Arise, you shall not kneel.","Arise. You need not kneel to me. Please rise, Queen."
"Sir, the gods Will have it thus. My master and my lord I must obey.","The gods have ordained it to be like this, sir. You are my lord and master. I must obey."
"Take to you no hard thoughts. The record of what injuries you did us, Though written in our flesh, we shall remember","Don’t think I blame you. Whatever injuries I received in the war, I put down to the fortunes of war."
"Sole sir o’ th’ world, I cannot project mine own cause so well To make it clear, but do confess I have Been laden with like frailties which before Have often shamed our sex.",You are now the sole lord of the entire world. I can’t explain my cause very clearly. I must admit to having the weaknesses that all women are accused of.
"Cleopatra, know If you apply yourself to our intents, Which towards you are most gentle, you shall find A benefit in this change, but if you seek To lay on me a cruelty by taking Of my good purposes and put your children To that destruction which I’ll guard them from If thereon you rely. I’ll take my leave.","Cleopatra, understand that, rather than emphasize our power over you, we will soften if you accept our intentions, which are very compassionate toward you. Your acceptance will benefit you, but if you try to make me look cruel by committing suicide as Antony did, I won’t be so generous. Your children will be destroyed, a fate your submission will save them from. I’ll leave you now."
"And may, through all the world! ’Tis yours, and we, Hang in what place you please. Here, my good lord.","You may do whatever you want in the world. It’s yours, and you may hang us, your trophies of war, anywhere you like. Here, my good lord."
You shall advise me in all for Cleopatra.,You shall advise me in everything having to do with Cleopatra.
"This is the brief of money, plate, and jewels I am possessed of. ’Tis exactly valued,","This is the inventory of the money, silverware, dishes, and jewels that are still in my possession. It’s an exact list. Not even trivial things were left out. Where’s Seleucus?"
"Here, madam.","Here, madam."
"This is my treasurer. Let him speak, my lord, Upon his peril, that I have reserved To myself nothing.—Speak the truth, Seleucus.","This is my treasurer. My lord, he will swear on his life that I haven’t kept a thing.—Tell the truth, Seleucus."
Than to my peril speak that which is not.,"Madam, I’d rather sew my lips shut than tell a lie when my life depends upon it."
What have I kept back?,What did I keep for myself?
Enough to purchase what you have made known.,Enough to buy everything you have declared.
"Nay, blush not, Cleopatra. I approve","No, don’t be ashamed, Cleopatra. You’re very prudent to set a little aside."
"See, Caesar! Oh, behold How pomp is followed! Mine will now be yours, And, should we shift estates, yours would be mine. The ingratitude of this Seleucus does Even make me wild. (to SELEUCUS ) O slave, of no more trust What, goest thou back? Thou shalt Go back, I warrant thee! But I’ll catch thine eyes, Though they had wings. Slave, soulless villain, dog! Oh, rarely base!","Look around you, Caesar. Oh, just see what happens after the pageantry is over! What is mine will be yours now. If we were to change places, what is yours would be mine. Seleucus’ ingratitude makes me wild. (to SELEUCUS ) Oh, you slave! I can’t trust you any more than a prostitute. What are you doing? Cringing away? I’ll give you a good reason to cringe, I promise you. I’ll scratch out your eyes, even if they could fly. You slave! Soulless villain! Dog! Oh, that was unbelievably low!"
"Good Queen, let us entreat you—","Good Queen, let me implore you—"
"O Caesar, what a wounding shame is this, Doing the honor of thy lordliness To one so meek, that mine own servant should Parcel the sum of my disgraces by Addition of his envy! Say, good Caesar, Immoment toys, things of such dignity As we greet modern friends withal, and say Some nobler token I have kept apart For Livia and Octavia, to induce With one that I have bred? The gods! It smites me Beneath the fall I have. (to SELEUCUS ) Prithee, go hence, Or I shall show the cinders of my spirit Through th’ ashes of my chance. Wert thou a man,","Oh, Caesar, I am so ashamed. You condescended to visit me here, honoring my humble self with your lordly presence. And one of my own servants increases my disgrace by adding his envy! Suppose, good Caesar, that I have saved a few feminine trifles, some unimportant trinkets. These have worth only as gifts to friends. And suppose I have kept a few more expensive gifts aside for Livia Octavius Caesar’s wife Livia and Octavia, to solicit their good wishes. Must I then be exposed by a person I’ve supported? By the gods! It adds another blow to the many I have already. (to SELEUCUS ) Please leave, or I’ll show you what’s left of my spirit since my fortune was ruined. If you were a real man, you would have had mercy on me."
"Forbear, Seleucus.","Leave, Seleucus."
"Be it known that we, the greatest, are misthought For things that others do, and when we fall We answer others’ merits in our name, Are therefore to be pitied.","You should also know that as head of state, we are often blamed for the crimes of others. And though we may fall, we are still responsible for their offenses. I am therefore to be pitied."
"Cleopatra, Put we i’ th’ roll of conquest. Still be ’t yours. Bestow it at your pleasure, and believe Caesar’s no merchant, to make prize with you Of things that merchants sold. Therefore be cheered. For we intend so to dispose you as Yourself shall give us counsel. Feed and sleep. Our care and pity is so much upon you That we remain your friend. And so, adieu.","Cleopatra, our conquest won’t include either the things you kept back or the ones you listed. It’s all still yours. Do whatever you like with it. You can trust that Caesar is not a merchant to haggle with you over your property. So cheer up. Don’t be captured by your depressed thoughts. No, dear Queen. We want to follow your own counsel when making arrangements for you. Eat and sleep. I have so much care and pity for you that you could call me friend. And so, good-bye."
"My master, and my lord!",My master and my lord!
Not so. Adieu.,Not true. Good-bye.
"He words me, girls, he words me, that I should not Be noble to myself. But, hark thee, Charmian.","He’s trying to talk me into forgetting my nobility, girls. But listen, Charmian."
"Finish, good lady. The bright day is done, And we are for the dark.","It’s time to end it, good lady. The bright day of our lives is over, and now there will only be darkness."
(to CHARMIAN )        Hie thee again. Go put it to the haste.,"(to CHARMIAN ) Go out again. I’ve already given the order, and it is ready. Hurry with your errand."
"Madam, I will.","I will, madam."
Where’s the Queen?,Where’s the Queen?
"Behold, sir.","Look, sir."
Dolabella!,Dolabella.
"Madam, as thereto sworn by your command, Which my love makes religion to obey, Intends his journey, and within three days You with your children will he send before. Make your best use of this. I have performed Your pleasure and my promise.","Madam, according to my promise—which my love to you has made a religious vow—I tell you that Caesar intends to travel through Syria. Within three days you and your children will be sent ahead. Make the best use of this information you can. I have done your bidding and fulfilled my promise."
"Dolabella,","Dolabella, I will always be in debt to you."
"I your servant. Adieu, good Queen. I must attend on Caesar.","And I your servant. Good-bye, good Queen. I must go attend Caesar."
"Farewell, and thanks.","Farewell, and thanks."
"Now, Iras, what think’st thou? Thou an Egyptian puppet shalt be shown In Rome, as well as I. Mechanic slaves Uplift us to the view. In their thick breaths, Rank of gross diet, shall be enclouded, And forced to drink their vapor.","Now, Iras, what do you think? You will be exhibited in Rome along with me, like Egyptian puppets. Crude slaves with greasy aprons, rulers, and hammers shall lift us up so everyone can see. Their stinking breath will form a cloud around us, and we’ll be forced to inhale it."
The gods forbid!,The gods forbid!
"Nay, ’tis most certain, Iras. Saucy lictors Ballad us out o’ tune. The quick comedians Extemporally will stage us and present Our Alexandrian revels. Antony Shall be brought drunken forth, and I shall see I’ th’ posture of a whore.","No, it’s certain, Iras. Insolent lictors Roman officers who assisted the judge lictors will paw us as if we were streetwalkers. Disreputable minstrels will write bawdy songs about us. Hotheaded comedians will stage impromptu impersonations of us and depict the celebrations we had in Alexandria. Antony will be portrayed as a drunk, and I’ll see some boy with a squeaking voice play Cleopatra as if I were a whore."
"Oh, the good gods!","Oh, the good gods!"
"Nay, that’s certain.","No, that’s the truth."
I’ll never see ’t! For I am sure mine nails Are stronger than mine eyes.,I’ll never see it. I know my nails are stronger than my eyes; I’ll scratch them out.
"Why, that’s the way Their most absurd intents.","Why, that’s just the way to frustrate their plans and defeat their absurd intentions."
"Now, Charmian! Show me, my women, like a queen. Go fetch My best attires. I am again for Cydnus, To meet Mark Antony.—Sirrah Iras, go.— And when thou hast done this chare I’ll give thee leave To play till doomsday. (to IRAS ) Bring our crown and all.","Now, Charmian! Women, dress me like a queen. Go get my best clothes. I will once again be as fine as when I went to Cydnus to meet Marc Antony.—Iras, go.—Now, Charmian, we’ll be quick indeed. And after you’ve done this chore, I’ll give you permission to amuse yourself until doomsday. (to IRAS ) Bring our crown and all the royal symbols of office."
Wherefore’s this noise?,What’s that noise?
Here is a rural fellow That will not be denied your Highness’ presence.,There’s a farmer here who won’t leave without seeing your Highness. He has brought you figs.
Let him come in.,Let him come in.
"What poor an instrument May do a noble deed! He brings me liberty. My resolution’s placed, and I have nothing Of woman in me. Now from head to foot No planet is of mine.","What a poor instrument, that can do such a noble deed! He brings me freedom. My mind is made up. There’s nothing of the weak woman left in me. Now from head to foot I’m as firm as marble. Now the inconstant moon has nothing to do with me."
This is the man.,This is the man.
"Avoid, and leave him.",Leave us.
"Hast thou the pretty worm of Nilus there, That kills and pains not?",Do you have in there the pretty snake of the Nile that kills without pain?
"Truly, I have him, but I would not be the party that should desire you to touch him, for his biting is immortal. Those that do die of it do seldom or never recover.","I certainly do have him, but I wouldn’t advise you to touch him. His bite is fatal. People who die of it seldom or never recover."
Remember’st thou any that have died on ’t?,Do you remember anyone who died of it?
"Very many, men and women too. I heard of one of them no longer than yesterday—a very honest woman, but something given to lie, as a woman should not do but in the way of honesty—how she died of the biting of it, what pain she felt. Truly, she makes a very good report o’ th’ worm. But he that will believe all that they say shall never be saved by half that they do. But this is most falliable, the worm’s an odd worm.","Many people, men and women alike. I heard of one just yesterday. She was a very honest woman but rather inclined to lie—which a woman shouldn’t do unless she’s protecting her reputation. I heard how she died of its bite, how much pain she felt. Indeed, she gives a very good testimony of the snake’s power. But if you believe everything they say, you won’t be saved by half of what they do. But this is a sure thing: the snake’s an odd snake."
"Get thee hence, farewell.",You may leave now. Farewell.
I wish you all joy of the worm.,I hope you are pleased with the snake.
Farewell.,Farewell.
"You must think this, look you, that the worm will do his kind.",You must know that the snake will act according to his nature.
"Ay, ay. Farewell.","Yes, yes. Farewell."
"Look you, the worm is not to be trusted but in the keeping of wise people, for indeed there is no goodness in the worm.","Listen, the snake is dangerous unless handled by people who are used to him. There isn’t any kindness in the snake."
Take thou no care. It shall be heeded.,Don’t worry; we’ll remember your warnings.
"Very good. Give it nothing, I pray you, for it is not worth the feeding.","Good. Don’t feed it, I beg you. It’s not worth feeding."
Will it eat me?,Will it eat me?
"You must not think I am so simple but I know the devil himself will not eat a woman. I know that a woman is a dish for the gods, if the devil dress her not. But, truly, these same whoreson devils do the gods great harm in their women, for in every ten that they make, the devils mar five.","Don’t think I’m so dumb that I don’t know that the devil himself won’t eat a woman. I know that a woman is a dish fit only for the gods, as long as the devil hasn’t prepared the meal. But devils cause a lot of trouble for the gods regarding their women. For every ten women the gods make, the devils ruin five."
"Well, get thee gone. Farewell.","Well, you can go now. Farewell."
"Yes, forsooth. I wish you joy o’ th’ worm.","Yes, truly, I wish you good luck with the snake."
Give me my robe. Put on my crown. I have Immortal longings in me. Now no more The juice of Egypt’s grape shall moist this lip.,Give me my robe. Put on my crown. I long to be immortal. I won’t drink Egyptian wine again.
"Antony call. I see him rouse himself To praise my noble act. I hear him mock The luck of Caesar, which the gods give men To excuse their after wrath.—Husband, I come! I am fire and air, my other elements I give to baser life.—So, have you done? Come then and take the last warmth of my lips. Farewell, kind Charmian. Iras, long farewell.","Quickly, quickly, good Iras, quickly. I think I hear Antony call me. I see him revive himself to praise my noble act. I hear him mock Caesar’s luck, which the gods give to men in order to balance out their subsequent wrath. Husband, I’m coming! Now let my courage prove my title as wife. I am now made of fire and air, and I leave the other elements, earth and water, to this mortal life. So, are you done? Come then, kiss me and take the last bit of warmth from my lips. Good-bye, kind Charmian. Iras, I won’t see you again for a long time."
"If thou and nature can so gently part, The stroke of death is as a lover’s pinch, Which hurts, and is desired. Dost thou lie still? If thus thou vanishest, thou tell’st the world","Do I have the asp’s poison on my lips? Did you fall? If you can leave your body so easily, then the touch of death is like a lover’s pinch, which hurts but is desired. Do you lie still? If you leave like that, you tell the world that it’s not worthy of a good-bye."
"Dissolve, thick cloud, and rain, that I may say The gods themselves do weep!","Clouds, dissolve into rain, so that I could say the gods themselves are weeping!"
"This proves me base. If she first meet the curlèd Antony, He’ll make demand of her and spend that kiss","This proves that I’m petty: if Iras meets Antony before me, he’ll want her first and give her the kiss that is my bliss to have. Come, you deadly villain."
"With thy sharp teeth this knot intrinsicate Of life at once untie. Poor venomous fool Be angry and dispatch. Oh, couldst thou speak, That I might hear thee call great Caesar ass","Separate me from life with your sharp teeth. Poor poisonous fool, be angry and bite. Oh, if you could speak, I might hear you call Caesar an ass who’s been outsmarted!"
O eastern star!,"Oh, eastern star!"
"Peace, peace! Dost thou not see my baby at my breast, That sucks the nurse asleep?","Quiet, quiet! Don’t you see my baby suckling at my breast so that its nurse will fall asleep?"
"Oh, break! Oh, break!","Oh, if my heart would only break!"
"As sweet as balm, as soft as air, as gentle— O Antony!—Nay, I will take thee too.","The poison is as sweet as balm, as soft as air, as gentle—Oh, Antony!—No, I’ll take you too."
What should I stay—,Why should I stay—
"In this wild world? So, fare thee well. Now boast thee, Death, in thy possession lies A lass unparalleled. Downy windows, close,","In this vile world? So, good-bye. Now, Death, you can boast that you have an incomparable girl in your possession. Close, soft eyes."
And golden Phoebus never be beheld I’ll mend it and then play—,"The sun will never be seen by such royal eyes again. Your crown is crooked. I’ll straighten it, then play—"
Where’s the Queen?,Where’s the Queen?
Speak softly. Wake her not.,Speak softly. Don’t wake her.
Caesar hath sent—,Caesar has sent—
Too slow a messenger.,Too slow a messenger.
"Oh, come apace, dispatch! I partly feel thee.","Oh, come quickly! I almost feel you."
"(calling) Approach, ho! All’s not well. Caesar’s beguiled.",(calling) Come in. Ho! All’s not well. Caesar’s been deceived.
There’s Dolabella sent from Caesar. Call him.,"There’s Dolabella, who was sent from Caesar. Call him."
"What work is here, Charmian? Is this well done?","What kind of work is this, Charmian? Is this well done?"
It is well done and fitting for a princess Descended of so many royal kings.,"It is well done, and appropriate for a princess who has descended from so many royal kings. Ah, soldier!"
How goes it here?,What’s going on in here?
All dead.,They’re all dead.
"Caesar, thy thoughts Touch their effects in this. Thyself art coming To see performed the dreaded act which thou So sought’st to hinder.","Caesar, you thought this would happen. You’re coming here yourself to see the dreaded act you had tried to stop."
"A way there, a way for Caesar!","Step aside, step aside for Caesar!"
"O sir, you are too sure an augurer. That you did fear is done.","Oh, sir, you are too good at predicting the future. What you were afraid of has happened."
"Bravest at the last, She leveled at our purposes and, being royal, I do not see them bleed.","She was bravest at the end. She knew what I intended to do with her and, being royal, she took her own way out. How did they die? I don’t see any blood."
Who was last with them?,Who was with them last?
A simple countryman that brought her figs. This was his basket.,A simple country farmer who brought her figs. This was the basket.
"Poisoned, then.","They were poisoned, then."
"Oh, Caesar, This Charmian lived but now. She stood and spake. On her dead mistress. Tremblingly she stood And on the sudden dropped.","Oh, Caesar, this Charmian lived until a moment ago. She stood and spoke. I found her adjusting the crown on her dead mistress. She stood trembling, then suddenly dropped dead."
"Oh, noble weakness! If they had swallowed poison, ’twould appear By external swelling, but she looks like sleep, In her strong toil of grace.","Oh, noble weakness! If they had swallowed poison, it would be evident by external swelling. But she looks like she’s asleep, as if she would charm another Antony."
"Here on her breast There is a vent of blood, and something blown. The like is on her arm.",Here on her breast there’s a little bloody mark. There’s a similar mark on her arm.
"This is an aspic’s trail, and these fig leaves Upon the caves of Nile.","This is an asp’s trail, and these fig leaves have slime on them, just like the kind that asps deposit on the caves by the Nile."
"Most probable That so she died, for her physician tells me She hath pursued conclusions infinite Of easy ways to die. Take up her bed She shall be buried by her Antony. No grave upon the earth shall clip in it A pair so famous. High events as these Strike those that make them, and their story is Brought them to be lamented. Our army shall In solemn show attend this funeral, And then to Rome. Come, Dolabella, see High order in this great solemnity.","That’s probably how she died. Her doctor told me she had searched for an infinite number of easy ways to die. Pick up her bed and carry her ladies out of the tomb. She shall be buried next to her Antony. No other grave on earth shall hold a pair this famous. Momentous events like these strike those that cause them. Antony and Cleopatra’s story is as pitiable as my military exploits are glorious. Our army shall somberly attend this funeral and then depart for Rome. Come, Dolabella. See that there is a dignified splendor to this great solemnity."
