"Before we proceed any further, hear me speak.","Before we go any further, listen to me."
"Speak, speak.","Speak, speak."
You are all resolved rather to die than to famish?,Are you all certain that you’d rather die fighting than starve to death?
Resolved. resolved.,"Yes, we’re certain."
"First, you know Caius Martius is chief enemy to the people.","As you know, Caius Martius is our chief enemy."
"We know’t, we know’t.","Yes, we know."
"Let us kill him, and we’ll have corn at our own price. Is’t a verdict?","Let’s kill him, so we can sell our corn at the price we choose. Are we agreed?"
"No more talking on’t; let it be done: away, away!",No need to talk about this anymore—let’s do it. Let’s go.
"One word, good citizens.","May I speak, good citizens?"
"We are accounted poor citizens, the patricians good. What authority surfeits on would relieve us: if they would yield us but the superfluity, while it were wholesome, we might guess they relieved us humanely; afflicts us, the object of our misery, is as an inventory to particularise their abundance; our sufferance is a gain to them. Let us revenge this with our pikes, ere we become rakes: for the gods know I","We’re poor. The nobles are rich. The nobles have so much to eat that they overindulge and get sick, but if they’d only give us their excess food, we wouldn’t be starving any longer. We’d think they were compassionate if they helped us, but they think we’re too expensive to feed and don’t deserve to eat. They look at our thin, starving bodies and see them as a measure of their own abundance. Our suffering shows them how much they have. Let’s seek revenge with our pitchforks before we become as thin as rakes. The gods know I only say this because I’m hungry for bread, not thirsty for revenge."
Would you proceed especially against Caius Martius?,Would you attack Caius Martius in particular?
Against him first: he’s a very dog to the commonalty.,We should attack him first. He’s like a cruel dog to the people.
Consider you what services he has done for his country?,Have you considered the ways he has served our country?
Very well; and could be content to give him good,"I’ve considered them very well, and I’d be happy to honor him for his service, except he already honors himself by being proud."
"Nay, but speak not maliciously.",Don’t speak so harshly.
"I say unto you, what he hath done famously, he did it to that end: though soft-conscienced men can be content to say it was for his country he did it to is, even till the altitude of his virtue.","Listen, all that he’s famous for doing, he did simply to become famous. Slow-witted men can be content to say he acted on behalf of his country, but the truth is that he fought to please his mother and also, in part, out of pride. He has just as much pride as courage."
"What he cannot help in his nature, you account a vice in him. You must in no way say he is covetous.","You call it a vice, but being proud is his nature. And you can’t accuse him of being interested in the spoils of war."
"If I must not, I need not be barren of accusations;","Even if I stop accusing him of pride, I’ll still have plenty of other complaints against him. He has so many faults, I grow tired of repeating them to you."
What shouts are these? The other side o’ the city is risen: why stay we prating here? to the Capitol!,Who’s shouting? The other side of the city is taking action. Why are we standing around talking? Let’s go to the capitol!
"Come, come.",Let’s go.
Soft! who comes here?,"Wait, who’s coming?"
the people.,"It’s worthy Menenius Agrippa, one who has always loved the people."
He’s one honest enough: would all the rest were so!,He’s decent enough. I wish that all the other nobles were!
"What work’s, my countrymen, in hand? where go you With bats and clubs? The matter? speak, I pray you.","What are you working on, my countrymen? Where are you going with bats and clubs? What’s the matter? Please tell me."
"had inkling this fortnight what we intend to do, which now we’ll show ’em in deeds. They say poor suitors have strong breaths: they shall know we have strong arms too.","The Senate knows what we’re upset about. They’ve known for two weeks what we intend to do, and now we’re going to show them. They say poor workers have bad breath. They’re about to find out that we have strong arms too."
Will you undo yourselves?,"Masters, my good friends, my honest neighbors, why will you harm yourselves?"
"We cannot, sir, we are undone already.",We’re already hurt.
"I tell you, friends, most charitable care Have the patricians of you. For your wants, Strike at the heaven with your staves as lift them Against the Roman state, whose course will on The way it takes, cracking ten thousand curbs Of more strong link asunder than can ever The gods, not the patricians, make it, and Your knees to them, not arms, must help. Alack, You are transported by calamity Thither where more attends you, and you slander When you curse them as enemies.","I tell you, friends, the nobles take very good care of you. For the relief you want from your suffering, you’d do just as well to rise up against the heavens as against the Roman state. The Senate isn’t going to change its course. However strong a chain you form, the Senate will break you because it’s ten thousand times stronger. The gods, not the nobles, are responsible for whatever you lack, therefore you should fall to your knees and pray, not raise your arms and fight. You’re getting carried away by your calamity, and you’re only inviting more trouble. You’re slandering the senators, cursing them as your enemies, without realizing that they care for you like fathers care for their children."
"Care for us! True, indeed! They ne’er cared for us yet: suffer us to famish, and their store-houses crammed with grain; make edicts for usury, to established against the rich, and provide more piercing statutes daily, to chain up and restrain the poor. If the wars eat us not up, they will; and there’s all the love they bear us.","Care for us? As if! They’ve never cared for us. They force us to starve while their storehouses are full of grain. They make laws about loaning money that protect the loan sharks. Every day they repeal the laws that interfere with the interests of the wealthy and instead make strict laws to chain up and restrain the poor. If the wars we fight in don’t kill us, these laws will. That’s how well they care for us."
"Confess yourselves wondrous malicious, Or be accused of folly. I shall tell you A pretty tale: it may be you have heard it; But, since it serves my purpose, I will venture","You must either admit that you’re being extremely malicious or you’ll be accused of foolishness. I’ll tell you a relevant story. You may have heard it, but since it illustrates my point, I’ll venture to tell it again."
"Well, I’ll hear it, sir: yet you must not think to fob off our disgrace with a tale: but, an ’t please you, deliver.","Well, I’ll listen sir, but don’t think you can trick us out of our suffering with a story. But if it pleases you, tell it."
"There was a time when all the body’s members That only like a gulf it did remain I’ the midst o’ the body, idle and unactive, Still cupboarding the viand, never bearing Like labour with the rest, where the other instruments And, mutually participate, did minister Unto the appetite and affection common Of the whole body. The belly answer’d—","There was a time when all the body’s parts rebelled against the belly. They accused the belly of being an idle, inactive pool in the middle the body, always hoarding the food, never working as much as the rest of the parts. The other body parts did see and hear, think, instruct, walk, feel, and together worked for the needs and desires of the whole body. The belly answered—"
"Well, sir, what answer made the belly?","Well, sir, what did the belly answer?"
"Which ne’er came from the lungs, but even thus— For, look you, I may make the belly smile As well as speak—it tauntingly replied To the discontented members, the mutinous parts As you malign our senators for that They are not such as you.","Sir, I’ll tell you. With a disdainful smile—look, I can make the belly smile as well as speak—the belly tauntingly replied to the aggravated, mutinous parts that envied the food it received—much like you who rightly accuse our senators for not starving as you do."
"Your belly’s answer? What! The kingly-crowned head, the vigilant eye, Our steed the leg, the tongue our trumpeter. With other muniments and petty helps In this our fabric, if that they—","What did the belly say? That the regal head, the watchful eye, the wise heart, the fighting arms, the mobile legs, the expressive tongue, with some small help from the other parts, if they—"
What then?,"What then? My word, you’re quite a speaker! What then? What then?"
"Should by the cormorant belly be restrain’d, Who is the sink o’ the body,—","The greedy belly, the sink of the body, should be restrained—"
"Well, what then?",And then what?
"The former agents, if they did complain,","If the parts complained, what could the belly answer?"
"I will tell you If you’ll bestow a small—of what you have little— Patience awhile, you’ll hear the belly’s answer.","I’ll tell you. If you’ll exercise a little bit of what little patience you have, you’ll hear the belly’s answer."
Ye’re long about it.,You’re taking a long time to tell it.
"Your most grave belly was deliberate, Not rash like his accusers, and thus answer’d: ‘True is it, my incorporate friends,’ quoth he, ‘That I receive the general food at first, Because I am the store-house and the shop Of the whole body: but, if you do remember, I send it through the rivers of your blood, Even to the court, the heart, to the seat o’ the brain; The strongest nerves and small inferior veins From me receive that natural competency Whereby they live: and though that all at once, You, my good friends,’—this says the belly, mark me,—","Pay attention, good friend. The belly was serious and deliberate, not rash like his accusers, and so he answered, “It’s true, my fellow parts,” he said, “That I am first to receive the food supply that you live on. This is as it should be, because I am the storehouse and the shop of the whole body. But if you’ll remember, I send it through the rivers of your blood, even to the court of the heart, to the throne of the brain, and through the ducts and chambers of the body, the strongest nerves and small inferior veins receive from me all that they need to survive. And despite all that, you, my good friends,” says the belly—"
"Ay, sir; well, well.","Yes, sir, go on."
"‘Though all at once cannot See what I do deliver out to each, Yet I can make my audit up, that all From me do back receive the flour of all,","“Even though all the parts can’t see at once what I deliver out to each, I can account that all parts receive from me all the flour I get, and that all I’m left with is the bran.” What do you say that?"
It was an answer: how apply you this?,It’s an answer. How does it apply to us?
"The senators of Rome are this good belly, And you the mutinous members; for examine Their counsels and their cares, digest things rightly No public benefit which you receive But it proceeds or comes from them to you And no way from yourselves. What do you think, You, the great toe of this assembly?","The senators of Rome are this good belly, and you are the unhappy parts. Examine their decisions and their responsibilities, see how they relate to the common good, and you’ll find that there is no public benefit that you receive that doesn’t come from them to you. Nothing is being taken from you. What do you think, you, the great toe of this assembly?"
I the great toe! why the great toe?,I am the great toe? Why the great toe?
"For that, being one o’ the lowest, basest, poorest, Of this most wise rebellion, thou go’st foremost: Thou rascal, that art worst in blood to run, Lead’st first to win some vantage. Rome and her rats are at the point of battle; The one side must have bale.","For the fact that you’re the leader of these ignorant rebels who are the lowest, basest, poorest of men. You’re like a stray dog that runs after whatever it can catch first. But prepare your sturdy bats and clubs: Rome and you, her rats, are at the point of battle. One side is going to lose."
"Hail, noble Martius!","Hail, noble Martius!"
"Thanks. What’s the matter, you dissentious rogues, Make yourselves scabs?","Thanks. What’s the matter, you dissenting rebels? Are you make yourselves miserable by rubbing the minor itch of your opinion?"
We have ever your good word.,You always speak kindly to us.
"He that will give good words to thee will flatter Beneath abhorring. What would you have, you curs, The other makes you proud. He that trusts to you, Where he should find you lions, finds you hares; Where foxes, geese: you are no surer, no, Than is the coal of fire upon the ice, To make him worthy whose offence subdues him And curse that justice did it. Who deserves greatness Deserves your hate; and your affections are Which would increase his evil. He that depends Upon your favours swims with fins of lead And hews down oaks with rushes. Hang ye! Trust Ye? With every minute you do change a mind, Him vile that was your garland. What’s the matter, That in these several places of the city You cry against the noble senate, who, Under the gods, keep you in awe, which else","Whoever speaks kindly to you flatters you undeservingly. What do you want, you dogs, who are satisfied by neither peace nor war? The one frightens you, and the other makes you self-righteous. Whoever trusts you sees you as lions, though he should see you as hares, and sees you as foxes, though he should see you as geese. You’re as unstable as a burning coal on ice or a hailstone in the sun. Your nature is to honor those who should be punished for their crimes and then to curse the justice that punishes him. He who deserves greatness deserves your scorn. Your instincts are perverted: you most desire the things that will make you sicker. He who depends on your approval swims with fins of lead and cuts down oaks with blades of grass. You should be hanged! Trust you? You change your mind every minute. You call the man you hated a moment ago “noble,” and you call the one you used to praise “vile.” Why do you cry against the noble Senate all around the city? Second only to the gods, they take care of you, you who would otherwise eat each other. What do the people want?"
"For corn at their own rates; whereof, they say, The city is well stored.",They want to sell corn at their own rates. They say the city has plenty.
"Hang ’em! They say! They’ll sit by the fire, and presume to know Who thrives and who declines; side factions and give out Conjectural marriages; making parties strong And feebling such as stand not in their liking grain enough! Would the nobility lay aside their ruth, And let me use my sword, I’ll make a quarry With thousands of these quarter’d slaves, as high","Hang them if that’s what they say! They’ll sit by the fire and presume to know what goes on in the capitol: who’s likely to rise, who thrives, and who declines. They’ll take sides with factions and make hasty alliances, making some groups strong and squashing those that they don’t like beneath their cheap shoes. They say there’s enough grain? If the nobility would stop taking pity on the poor and let me use my sword, I’d slaughter these thousands of slaves into a pile of pieces as high as I could throw my lance."
"Nay, these are almost thoroughly persuaded; For though abundantly they lack discretion, Yet are they passing cowardly. But, I beseech you, What says the other troop?","No, they’ve almost all calmed down. Even though they make a scene, they’re actually very cowardly. But tell me, what happened with the other group of rebels?"
"They said they were an-hungry; sigh’d forth proverbs, That hunger broke stone walls, that dogs must eat, That meat was made for mouths, that the gods sent not Corn for the rich men only: with these shreds And a petition granted them, a strange one— To break the heart of generosity, And make bold power look pale—they threw their caps As they would hang them on the horns o’ the moon,","They’ve disbanded. Hang them! They said they were hungry, they quoted proverbs: That hunger broke stone walls, that dogs must eat, that meat was made for mouths, that the gods didn’t send corn only for the rich. With these small statements they vented their complaints, and when the nobles answered by granting them a petition—which is unusual because it breaks the solidarity of the nobles and makes them look weak—they threw their caps into the air with joy, shouting their delight."
What is granted them?,What was granted to them?
"Five tribunes to defend their vulgar wisdoms, Of their own choice: one’s Junius Brutus, Sicinius Velutus, and I know not—’Sdeath! Ere so prevail’d with me: it will in time Win upon power and throw forth greater themes For insurrection’s arguing.","Five representatives of their own choosing to defend their ignorant views. Junius Brutus, Sicinius Velutus, and I don’t know who else. God’s death! The rebels would have to tear the roofs off the city before they could ever prevail upon me to grant them that. They’ll soon become more powerful and make more arguments for insurrection."
This is strange.,This is strange.
"(to the rebels) Go, get you home, you fragments!","(to the rebels) Go home, you crumbs!"
Where’s Caius Martius?,Where’s Caius Martius?
Here: what’s the matter?,I’m here. What’s going on?
"The news is, sir, the Volsces are in arms.","Sir, the news is that the Volsces are prepared to fight."
I am glad on ‘t: then we shall ha’ means to vent,"I’m glad about this. This means we’ll have a way to get rid of our excess population. Look, here come our best elders."
"Martius, ’tis true that you have lately told us; The Volsces are in arms.","Martius, it’s true what you’ve been telling us lately: the Volsces are ready to fight."
"They have a leader, Tullus Aufidius, that will put you to ’t. And were I any thing but what I am, I would wish me only he.","They have a leader, Tullus Aufidius, that will put you to the test. It’s a sin, but I envy his leadership. If I could be anyone other than who I am, I would only wish to be him."
You have fought together.,You’ve fought each other?
Were half to half the world by the ears and he. Only my wars with him: he is a lion That I am proud to hunt.,"If a quarter of the world were fighting and he were on my side, I’d revolt to fight only him. He’s a lion that I am proud to hunt."
"Then, worthy Martius, Attend upon Cominius to these wars.","Then, worthy Martius, help Cominius with these wars."
It is your former promise.,As you promised earlier.
"Sir, it is; And I am constant. Titus Lartius, thou Shalt see me once more strike at Tullus’ face. What, art thou stiff? stand’st out?","Sir, I did, and I’ll keep my word. Titus Lartius, you’ll see me strike at Tullus’s face once more. Are you hesitating? Do you not want to fight?"
"I’ll lean upon one crutch and fight with t’other, Ere stay behind this business.","No, Caius Martius, I’ll lean upon one crutch and fight with the other before I stay out of this business."
"O, true-bred!","Oh, you were raised to fight!"
"Your company to the Capitol; where, I know,",Let’s go to the capitol. I know our greatest friends wait for us there.
[To COMINIUS] Lead you on.,(to Cominius) Take the lead.
Right worthy you priority.,"Follow Cominius, and we’ll follow you. You deserve to go before us."
Noble Martius!,Noble Martius!
[To the Citizens] Hence to your homes; be gone!,"(to the citizens) Go now to your homes, be gone."
"The Volsces have much corn; take these rats thither To gnaw their garners. Worshipful mutiners, Your valour puts well forth: pray, follow.","No, let them follow us. The Volsces have a lot of corn. Take these rats to gnaw at their granaries. Worshipful rebels, your courage is impressive, please follow us."
Was ever man so proud as is this Martius?,Was there ever a man as proud as Martius?
He has no equal.,He has no equal.
"When we were chosen tribunes for the people,—",When we were chosen as representatives for the people—
Mark’d you his lip and eyes?,Did you notice his lip and eyes?
Nay. [B]ut his taunts.,"No, only his taunts."
"Being moved, he will not spare to gird the gods.","When he’s angry, he’ll even taunt the gods."
Be-mock the modest moon.,He’d mock the calmness of the moon.
The present wars devour him: he is grown Too proud to be so valiant.,May this war destroy him! His courage has made him too proud.
"Such a nature, Tickled with good success, disdains the shadow His insolence can brook to be commanded Under Cominius.","A nature such as his, which has been amplified by all his successes, disdains his own shadow, which he walks on at noon. I wonder if his pride can handle being under Cominius’s command."
"Fame, at the which he aims, In whom already he’s well graced, can not A place below the first: for what miscarries Shall be the general’s fault, though he perform To the utmost of a man, and giddy censure Will then cry out of Martius ‘O if he","The fame he aims for, and with which he has already been graced, can’t be maintained or increased in any position other than the lead. Whatever goes wrong will be seen as the general’s fault, even though he’ll do the best job a man could do, and fickle public opinion will then say of Martius, “Oh, if only he had been in charge!”"
"Besides, if things go well, Opinion that so sticks on Martius shall Of his demerits rob Cominius.","Besides, if things go well, public opinion that favors Martius will steal praise away from Cominius."
"Come: Though Martius earned them not, and all his faults To Martius shall be honours, though indeed In aught he merit not.","Indeed, half of all Cominius’s victories have been credited to Martius, though he didn’t win them. And whatever faults Cominius has are seen as Martius’s honors, though Martius really doesn’t have any merit."
"Let’s hence, and hear More than his singularity, he goes Upon this present action.","Let’s go and hear what’s happening. Let’s see how, our feelings about his personality aside, he prepares for this battle."
Lets along.,Let’s go.
"So, your opinion is, Aufidius, That they of Rome are entered in our counsels And know how we proceed.","So Aufidius, your opinion is that the Romans have spied on our council meetings and know how we proceed."
"Is it not yours? That could be brought to bodily act ere Rome Had circumvention? ’Tis not four days gone Since I heard thence; these are the words: I think I have the letter here; yes, here it is.","Don’t you agree? Haven’t all the plans we’ve ever discussed here that could be put into action against Rome been thwarted? Not even four days have gone by since I heard from the field, these are the words—I think I have the letter here—yes, here it is."
"Whether for east or west: the dearth is great; The people mutinous; and it is rumour’d, Cominius, Martius your old enemy, Who is of Rome worse hated than of you, These three lead on this preparation Whither ’tis bent: most likely ’tis for you: Consider of it.’","“They’ve raised an army, but it’s not known whether they will march east or west. The famine is serious, the people are rebelling, and it’s rumored that Cominius, your old enemy Martius—who the Romans hate worse than you—and Titus Lartius, a most valiant Roman, these three lead the attack, wherever it’s headed. Most likely toward you. Think about it.”"
Our army’s in the field To answer us.,Our army’s in the field. We’ve never doubted that the Romans were ready to fight back.
"Nor did you think it folly To keep your great pretences veil’d till when They needs must show themselves; which It seem’d, appear’d to Rome. By the discovery. We shall be shorten’d in our aim, which was To take in many towns ere almost Rome Should know we were afoot.","You thought it was wise to keep your plans secret until they needed to be revealed, but it seems that the Romans knew your plans as soon as they were hatched. Since they know our intention, we can’t proceed as we had planned: to capture as many towns as possible before the Romans knew we were moving toward them."
"Take your commission; hie you to your bands: Let us alone to guard Corioli: If they set down before ’s, for the remove Bring your army; but, I think, you’ll find","Noble Aufidius, do your duty. Go to your men. Leave us here to guard Corioles ourselves. If they attack us, bring your army back before they take the city, but I think you’ll find they haven’t prepared for us."
"O, doubt not that; I speak from certainties. Nay, more, Some parcels of their power are forth already, And only hitherward. I leave your honours. ’Tis sworn between us we shall ever strike Till one can do no more.","Don’t be so sure. I’m certain when I say that some part of their army is already moving toward us. I leave you now, noblemen. If we happen to meet Caius Martius, he and I have sworn that we’ll always strike at each other until one of us can strike no more."
The gods assist you!,May the gods assist you!
And keep your honours safe!,And keep you noblemen safe!
Farewell.,Farewell.
Farewell.,Farewell.
Farewell.,Farewell.
"I pray you, daughter, sing; or express yourself in a more comfortable sort: if my son were my husband, I should freelier rejoice in that absence wherein he won honour than in the embracements of his bed where tender-bodied and the only son of my womb, when youth with comeliness plucked all gaze his way, when for a day of kings’ entreaties a mother should not sell him an hour from her beholding, I, considering no better than picture-like to hang by the wall, if renown made it not stir, was pleased to let him seek danger where he was like to find fame. To a cruel war I sent him; from whence he returned, his brows more in joy at first hearing he was a man-child than now in first seeing he had proved himself a man.","Please, my daughter-in-law, sing or express yourself more cheerfully. If my son were my husband, I would be happier with him away winning honors than lovingly embracing me in bed. Before he was full grown, when he was still my only child, when he was boyishly handsome and attracting much attention, when even if the king begged me I shouldn’t have let him out of my sight for an hour, I considered how honored he would become, and that unless he were inspired to make a name for himself, he would be no better than a picture hanging on the wall, so I happily let him face danger, because that’s how he was likely to find fame. I sent him to a cruel war from which he returned crowned with garlands of oak. I tell you, daughter-in-law, I jumped for joy more to see that he had proven himself as a man than I did when I first heard he was a boy child."
"But had he died in the business, madam; how then?","But if had he died in the war, madam, how would you feel then?"
"therein would have found issue. Hear me profess sincerely: had I a dozen sons, each in my love alike and none less dear than thine and my good Martius, I had rather had eleven die nobly for their","Then his noble deeds would have been my son—in them I would have found my legacy. Listen to me seriously: if I had a dozen sons and loved them equally, as much as I love our Martius, I would rather that eleven of them die nobly for their country than one choose the pleasures of making love over doing his duty."
"(to Volumnia) Madam, the Lady Valeria is come to visit you.","(to Volumnia) Madam, the Lady Valeria has come to see you."
"Beseech you, give me leave to retire myself.",May I please be excused to have some time alone?
"Indeed, you shall not. Methinks I hear hither your husband’s drum, As children from a bear, the Volsces shunning him: Methinks I see him stamp thus, and call thus: ‘Come on, you cowards! you were got in fear, Though you were born in Rome:’ his bloody brow Like to a harvest-man that’s task’d to mow Or all or lose his hire.","No, you may not. I think I hear your husband’s drum coming toward us. He must have plucked out all Aufidius’s hairs so the Volsces will avoid him the way children run from a bear. I think I see him stamping like this, and calling like this: “Come on, you cowards! You were born in fear even though you were born in Rome.” He’s wiping his bloody forehead with his armored hand. He’s unrelenting like a laborer who must harvest a whole field or not be paid at all."
"His bloody brow! O Jupiter, no blood!","His bloody forehead! Oh, Jupiter, king of the gods, not blood!"
"Away, you fool! it more becomes a man When she did suckle Hector, look’d not lovelier Than Hector’s forehead when it spit forth blood At Grecian sword, contemning. Tell Valeria, We are fit to bid her welcome.","Don’t be foolish! Blood belongs on a man more than gold belongs on his trophy. When Hecuba suckled Hector, her breasts were no lovelier than Hector’s forehead when a Grecian sword struck it and it gushed furiously with blood. Tell Valeria that we welcome her in."
Heavens bless my lord from fell Aufidius!,Heavens protect my husband from the deadly Aufidius!
He’ll beat Aufidius’ head below his knee And tread upon his neck.,He’ll beat Aufidius’s head down below his knees and then stand on his neck.
"My ladies both, good day to you.","My ladies, good day to you both."
Sweet madam.,Sweet madam.
I am glad to see your ladyship.,"I’m glad to see you, your ladyship."
"How do you both? you are manifest house-keepers. (to Volumnia) What are you sewing here? A fine spot, in good faith. (to Virgilia) How does your little son?",How are you both? You are remarkable house-keepers. (to Volumnia) What are you sewing here? It looks like fine embroidery. (to Virgilia) How is your little son?
"I thank your ladyship; well, good madam.","Thank you, your ladyship. He’s fine, good madam."
look upon his school-master.,He’d rather see the soldiers and hear a drum than do his schoolwork.
"O’ my word, the father’s son: I’ll swear, ’tis a very pretty boy. O’ my troth, I looked upon him o’ Wednesday half an hour together: has such a butterfly: and when he caught it, he let it go again; and after it again; and over and over he comes, and again; catched it again; or whether his fall enraged him, or how ’twas, he did so set his it!","It’s true, he’s his father’s son. He’s a very good-looking boy. I spent half an hour with him on Wednesday. He is so determined. I saw him run after a golden butterfly, and when he caught it, he let it go and then went after it again. He fell down and got back up and again he caught the butterfly. I don’t know whether his fall enraged him or what, but he clenched his teeth and tore it. I tell you, he ripped it apart!"
One on ’s father’s moods.,He has his father’s moods.
"Indeed, la, ’tis a noble child.","Indeed, dear, he’s a noble child."
"A crack, madam.","He’s devilish, madam."
the idle husewife with me this afternoon.,Set aside your stitching. Pretend to be an idle housewife with me this afternoon.
"No, good madam; I will not out of doors.","No, good madam. I can’t go out today."
Not out of doors!,Can’t go out?
"She shall, she shall.","She will, she will."
threshold till my lord return from the wars.,No. Please let me stay in. I won’t cross the threshold until my husband returns from the war.
"Fie, you confine yourself most unreasonably: come, you must go visit the good lady that lies in.","You’re being unreasonable to confine yourself. Come, you must go visit our neighbor, who’s expecting a baby."
"I will wish her speedy strength, and visit her with","I wish her an easy birth and send her my prayers, but I can’t go see her."
"Why, I pray you?",Why not?
"’Tis not to save labour, nor that I want love.",It’s not because I’m lazy or don’t care for her.
"You would be another Penelope: yet, they say, all the yarn she spun in Ulysses’ absence did but fill were sensible as your finger, that you might leave pricking it for pity. Come, you shall go with us.","You’re like another Penelope, except they say that all the yarn she spun in Ulysses’ absence only filled Ithaca with moths. I wish your embroidery cloth were as sensitive as your finger, that way you might take pity on it and stop pricking it. Come with us."
"No, good madam, pardon me; indeed, I will not forth.","No, good madam, please excuse me. I won’t go."
"In truth, la, go with me; and I’ll tell you","Truly, come with me, and I’ll tell you excellent news about your husband."
"O, good madam, there can be none yet.","Oh, good madam, there can’t be good news yet."
"Verily, I do not jest with you; there came news from him last night.",I’m not kidding you. News came from him last night.
"Indeed, madam?","Really, madam?"
"Thus it is: the Volsces have an army forth; against whom Cominius the general is gone, with one part of our Roman power: your lord and Titus Lartius are set down before their city Corioli; they nothing doubt on mine honour; and so, I pray, go with us.","Yes, it’s true. I heard a senator talking. He said Cominius the general is leading one part of our Roman army against the oncoming Volsces. Your husband and Titus Lartius are attacking their city Corioles. They have no doubt that they’ll win and that the battle won’t last long. On my honor, this news is true. Please come out with us."
"Give me excuse, good madam; I will obey you in every thing hereafter.","Forgive me, good madam. I’ll do as you say from now on."
"(to Valeria) Let her alone, lady: as she is now, she will but","(to Valeria) Let her stay home, lady. The way she is now, she’ll only detract from our celebration."
"In troth, I think she would. Fare you well, then. Come, good sweet lady. Prithee, Virgilia, turn thy solemness out o’ door and go along with us.","I think you’re right—she will. Cheer up then, good sweet lady. Please, Virgilia, shake off your sad mood and come out with us."
"No, at a word, madam; indeed, I must not. I wish","No. In a word, madam, I simply can’t. I wish you much happiness."
"Well, then, farewell.","Well then, goodbye."
Yonder comes news. A wager they have met.,Here comes news. I bet there’s been a battle.
"My horse to yours, no.",I bet you my horse for yours that there hasn’t been a battle.
’Tis done.,It’s a bet.
Agreed.,Agreed.
"Say, has our general met the enemy?","Tell us, has our general been in battle with the enemy?"
They lie in view; but have not spoke as yet.,"They can see each other, but they haven’t fought yet."
"So, the good horse is mine.","So, your good horse is mine."
I’ll buy him of you.,I’ll buy him back from you.
"No, I’ll nor sell nor give him: lend you him I will","No, I’ll won’t sell or give him away. I’ll lend him to you for fifty years. Alert the town."
How far off lie these armies?,How far away are the armies?
Within this mile and half.,Within a mile and a half.
"Then shall we hear their ’larum, and they ours. Now, Mars, I prithee, make us quick in work, To help our fielded friends! Come, blow thy blast.","Then we’ll hear their call to arms, and they’ll hear ours. Now, Mars, god of war, I pray to you, make our attack quick, so that with victorious swords we may march from here to help our friends on the battlefield! (to the trumpeter) Come, blow your blast."
"(to the Senators) Tutus Aufidius, is he within your walls?",(to the Senators) Is Tullus Aufidius inside these walls?
"No, nor a man that fears you less than he, That’s lesser than a little.","No. And there isn’t a man here who fears you any less than he does, which is virtually not at all."
"Are bringing forth our youth. We’ll break our walls, Rather than they shall pound us up: our gates, Which yet seem shut, we, have but pinn’d with rushes; They’ll open of themselves.","(to the Volsces) Listen! Our drums are summoning our young soldiers. We’d rather break down our own walls than let them fence us in. Our gates, which look locked, are actually just gently shut. They’ll open on their own."
"There is Aufidius; list, what work he makes Amongst your cloven army.","(to the Romans) Listen! In the distance, that’s Aufidius. Listen to how he’s beating your divided army."
"O, they are at it!","Oh, they’re fighting each other!"
"Their noise be our instruction. Ladders, ho!",Their noise tells us what to do. Raise the ladders!
"Now put your shields before your hearts, and fight With hearts more proof than shields. Advance, brave Titus: They do disdain us much beyond our thoughts, He that retires I’ll take him for a Volsce, And he shall feel mine edge.","They’re not afraid of us—instead they march out of their own city. Cover your hearts with your shields now and fight with hearts that are stronger than these shields. Go forward, brave Titus. They hate us more than we think, which makes me sweat with anger. Come on, my fellow soldiers. Whoever hangs back, I’ll think you’re a Volsce, and you’ll feel the edge of my sword."
"All the contagion of the south light on you, You shames of Rome! you herd of—Boils and plagues Further than seen and one infect another Against the wind a mile! You souls of geese, That bear the shapes of men, how have you run From slaves that apes would beat! Pluto and hell! With flight and agued fear! Mend and charge home, Or, by the fires of heaven, I’ll leave the foe And make my wars on you: look to’t: come on; If you’ll stand fast, we’ll beat them to their wives,","I curse you with the plague of the south, you shameful Romans! You bunch of—may blisters and infection cover over you so that people will smell you before they see you, and may your disease spread on the wind for a mile, even when the wind blows against you! You look like men, but you have the souls of geese. Why did you run from slaves that even apes could beat? Pluto, god of the dead and the underworld! You ran away and didn’t fight back; your backs are red with blood and your faces pale with fear! Pull yourselves together and charge again, or, by the fires of heaven, I’ll stop fighting the Volsces and attack you instead. Listen, if you can hold steady, we’ll beat them and take their wives. They’re in our trenches. Follow me!"
"So, now the gates are ope: now prove good seconds: ’Tis for the followers fortune widens them, Not for the fliers: mark me, and do the like.","So, the gates are open now. Support me well. Fortune opens the gates for those who follow me, not for those who run from battle. Listen to me, and do as I say."
Fool-hardiness; not I.,That’s crazy. I’m not going.
Nor I.,Neither am I.
"See, they have shut him in.","Look, they’ve locked him in."
"To the pot, I warrant him.",I’m sure he’ll end up in their cooking pot.
What is become of Martius?,What happened to Martius?
"Slain, sir, doubtless.","He has undoubtedly been killed, sir."
"With them he enters; who, upon the sudden, Clapp’d to their gates: he is himself alone, To answer all the city.","He followed right behind the fleeing Volsces and entered the city with them. They closed the gates behind him, and he’s in there all alone to fight the whole city."
"O noble fellow! And, when it bows, stands up. Thou art left, Martius: A carbuncle entire, as big as thou art, Were not so rich a jewel. Thou wast a soldier Even to Cato’s wish, not fierce and terrible The thunder-like percussion of thy sounds, Thou madst thine enemies shake, as if the world Were feverous and did tremble.","Oh, noble fellow! He’s braver than his sword, which cannot feel pain, and he stands firm while even his sword bends. You are gone for, Martius. A flawless red gem, as large as you, wouldn’t be as valuable a jewel as you are. You were the soldier {Cato │ A military adviser in ancient Rome.} would have wished for, not just fierce and terrible on occasion, but with your serious looks and your thunderous voice, you terrified your enemies as if the whole world were shaking with a fever."
"Look, sir.","Look, sir."
"Let’s fetch him off, or make remain alike.","Oh, it’s Martius! Let’s rescue him or we’ll be assaulted by the Volsces, too."
This will I carry to Rome.,I’ll bring this back to Rome.
And I this.,And I’ll bring this.
A murrain on’t! I took this for silver.,Curse it! I thought this was silver.
"See here these movers that do prize their hours Irons of a doit, doublets that hangmen would Bury with those that wore them, these base slaves, Ere yet the fight be done, pack up: down with them! And hark, what noise the general makes! To him! Piercing our Romans: then, valiant Titus, take Convenient numbers to make good the city; Whilst I, with those that have the spirit, will haste To help Cominius.","Look at these scavengers who spend their time gathering worthless coins! Cushions, lead spoons, cheap swords, clothes that hangmen would bury along with whoever died wearing them. These lowly slaves are packing up before the fight is even over. They’re the worst! And listen to the noise Cominius makes! Let’s go help him! Aufidius, the one my soul hates, is driving our Roman army apart. Valiant Titus, take enough men with you to secure the city. I’ll go now with those who have the spirit and help Cominius."
Thy exercise hath been too violent for A second course of fight.,"Worthy sir, you’re bleeding. Your efforts have been too violent for you to fight again now."
"Sir, praise me not; My work hath yet not warm’d me: fare you well: Than dangerous to me: to Aufidius thus I will appear, and fight.",Don’t flatter me. I’m not even warmed up yet. Good luck to you. Bleeding is more helpful to me than it is dangerous. I’ll find Aufidius and fight.
"Now the fair goddess, Fortune, Fall deep in love with thee; and her great charms Prosperity be thy page!","May the fair goddess Fortune fall deeply in love with you, and may she cast a spell on your opponents so their swords don’t strike you! Brave gentlemen, may you be successful!"
"Thy friend no less Than those she placeth highest! So, farewell.",May Fortune be no less a friend to you than she is to those she loves most! Good luck.
Thou worthiest Martius!,"You’re the bravest, Martius!"
"Call thither all the officers o’ the town, Where they shall know our mind: away!","Go, sound your trumpet in the marketplace. Bring all the town officials here. We’ll tell them what we’re thinking. Go!"
"Breathe you, my friends: well fought; we are come off Like Romans, neither foolish in our stands, Nor cowardly in retire: believe me, sirs, By interims and conveying gusts we have heard The charges of our friends. Ye Roman gods! Lead their successes as we wish our own, That both our powers, with smiling May give you thankful sacrifice.","Catch your breath, my friends. You fought well. We’ve cleared the enemy like Romans, neither foolish in our attacks nor cowardly in our retreat. Believe me, sirs, we’ll fight again. While we’ve been attacking, news has intermittently come to us, carried on the winds, about the battles fought by our friends. Oh, Roman gods! Grant them the success that we wish for as well, and may both our armies, with smiling faces, then gratefully offer you a sacrifice."
Thy news?,What news do you have?
"The citizens of Corioli have issued, And given to Lartius and to Martius battle: And then I came away.","The citizens of Corioles have left the city and are fighting with Lartius and Martius. Our group was driven to their trenches, and then I got away."
"Though thou speak’st truth, Methinks thou speak’st not well. How long is’t since?","You’re telling the truth, but you’re leaving something out. How long ago did this happen?"
"Above an hour, my lord.","More than an hour ago, my lord."
"’Tis not a mile; briefly we heard their drums: How couldst thou in a mile confound an hour, And bring thy news so late?",They’re not even a mile away. A little while ago we heard their drums. How could you waste an hour traveling only one mile and bring your news so late?
"Spies of the Volsces Three or four miles about, else had I, sir, Half an hour since brought my report.",Volscian spies chased me and I was forced to go three or four miles out of my way. Otherwise I would have brought my report half an hour earlier.
"Who’s yonder, That does appear as he were flay’d? O gods Before-time seen him thus.","Who’s over there, looking like he’s been skinned alive? Oh, gods, it looks like Martius, and I’ve seen him look like this before."
[Within] Come I too late?,(from offstage) Am I too late?
The shepherd knows not thunder from a tabour More than I know the sound of Martius’ tongue,I know the difference between the sound of Martius’s tongue and every lesser man even more than the shepherd knows the difference between the sound of thunder and a drum.
Come I too late?,Am I too late?
"Ay, if you come not in the blood of others, But mantled in your own.","Yes, but only if you’re drenched in your own blood, not the blood of others."
"O, let me clip ye As merry as when our nuptial day was done, And tapers burn’d to bedward!","Oh, let me hug you with arms as strong as when I wooed my wife, with a heart as happy as the day we married and the candles burned down, telling us it was time for bed!"
"Flower of warriors, How is it with Titus Lartius?","Prized warrior, how is Titus Lartius?"
"Condemning some to death, and some to exile; Ransoming him, or pitying, threatening the other; Holding Corioli in the name of Rome, Even like a fawning greyhound in the leash,","He’s busy with decrees: condemning some to death and some to exile, releasing men for ransom or pity, and threatening others. He’s holding Corioles in the name of Rome, as if the city were a greyhound on a leash, eager to please and ready to run."
Where is that slave Which told me they had beat you to your trenches? Where is he? call him hither.,Where is that slave who told me they had beaten you back to your trenches? Where is he? Call him here.
Let him alone; The common file—a plague! tribunes for them!-- The mouse ne’er shunn’d the cat as they did budge From rascals worse than they.,"Leave him alone. He told the truth. But as for our men, the common soldiers, I curse them with a plague! May they be tried in court! Like stray dogs, they ran away from the Volsces, who are lower-bred than they are. They ran like a mouse runs from a cat."
But how prevail’d you?,How did you triumph then?
"Where is the enemy? are you lords o’ the field? If not, why cease you till you are so?","Do I have enough time to tell you? I don’t think so. Where is the enemy? Have you captured this field? If not, why did you stop before you did?"
"Martius, We have at disadvantage fought and did","Martius, we’ve been fighting without enough soldiers or supplies, so we retreated temporarily to regroup, and then we’ll win."
How lies their battle? know you on which side They have placed their men of trust?,What’s their battle formation? Do you know what side their best men are on?
"As I guess, Martius, Their bands i’ the vaward are the Antiates, Their very heart of hope.","My guess, Martius, is that the Antiates, who they trust highly, are in the front. Leading them is Aufidius, the very heart of their hope."
"I do beseech you, By all the battles wherein we have fought, By the blood we have shed together, by the vows Set me against Aufidius and his Antiates; And that you not delay the present, but, Filling the air with swords advanced and darts, We prove this very hour.","By all the battles we’ve fought, by the blood we have shed together and by the vows we made to remain friends, I beg that you put me directly against Aufidius and his Antiates. And that you not hesitate but rather fill the air with raised swords and darts. Now is the time for us to prove ourselves."
"You were conducted to a gentle bath And balms applied to, you, yet dare I never Deny your asking: take your choice of those That best can aid your action.","I wish you were going now to a gentle bath and to have balms applied to you, but I never dare to deny what you ask. Take your choice of the men who can best help you."
"That most are willing. If any such be here— As it were sin to doubt—that love this painting Wherein you see me smear’d; if any fear Lesser his person than an ill report; And that his country’s dearer than himself; Let him alone, or so many so minded, Wave thus, to express his disposition, And follow Martius.","The men I choose are the ones most eager to fight. If there is any man here—and it would be a sin to doubt it—who loves seeing me smeared in blood, that fears more for his honor than for his personal safety, that thinks a brave death outweighs a bad life, and that his country is more important than himself, let him alone, or others if they feel the same, wave their arms now to tell me who they are. And then follow me."
"If these shows be not outward, which of you But is four Volsces? none of you but is Able to bear against the great Aufidius A shield as hard as his. A certain number, from all: the rest Shall bear the business in some other fight, As cause will be obey’d. Please you to march; And four shall quickly draw out my command,","Choose me! Make me one of your swordsmen! If these aren’t just superficial words, are there four among you who aren’t traitors? All of you would be able to fight the great Aufidius—your shields are as hard as his. I will only select four men, but thank you, all of you. The rest of you will fight our enemy in some other battle when the time comes. Please march, and I’ll quickly choose which men are best suited to this fight."
"March on, my fellows: Make good this ostentation, and you shall Divide in all with us.","March forward, men. Perform well, and we’ll all share the honor."
"So, let the ports be guarded: keep your duties, As I have set them down. If I do send, dispatch Those centuries to our aid: the rest will serve For a short holding: if we lose the field,","Guard the gate. Do your job as I’ve explained it. If I send a message, send those hundreds of soldiers to help us. The remaining soldiers can hold the city on their own for a little while. After all, if we lose in the field, we can’t keep the city anyway."
"Fear not our care, sir.","Don’t worry, sir, we’ll guard the city."
"Hence, and shut your gates upon’s. Our guider, come; to the Roman camp conduct us.","Good, and shut these gates once I’m gone. Here comes our scout to bring us to the Roman camp."
I’ll fight with none but thee; for I do hate thee Worse than a promise-breaker.,"I’ll fight only against you, because I hate you worse than a traitor."
We hate alike: Not Afric owns a serpent I abhor,We feel the same hatred. There’s not a snake in Africa that I hate more than your fame and envy. Prepare to fight.
"Let the first budger die the other’s slave, And the gods doom him after!","Whoever runs away from this fight first must become the other’s slave until death, and after that may the gods curse him!"
"If I fly, Martius, Holloa me like a hare.","If I run, Martius, hunt me like a hare."
"Alone I fought in your Corioli walls, And made what work I pleased: ’tis not my blood Wherein thou seest me mask’d; for thy revenge Wrench up thy power to the highest.","Less than three hours ago, Tullus, I fought alone inside the walls of Corioles, and I killed whoever I wanted. It’s not my own blood you see me covered in. For your revenge, fight me with your fullest force."
"That was the whip of your bragg’d progeny, Thou shouldst not scape me here.","If you’re anything like Hector, the failed champion of your ancestors whom you’re so proud of, you won’t escape me here."
"Officious, and not valiant, you have shamed me In your condemned seconds.","You’re intrusive, not brave. You’ve shamed me with your assistance, and I condemn you for it."
"If I should tell thee o’er this thy day’s work, Thou’ldst not believe thy deeds: but I’ll report it Where senators shall mingle tears with smiles, Where great patricians shall attend and shrug, And, gladly quaked, hear more; where the dull tribunes, That, with the fusty plebeians, hate thine honours, Shall say against their hearts ‘We thank the gods Yet camest thou to a morsel of this feast, Having fully dined before.","If I told you about all you did today, you wouldn’t believe it. But when I tell the senators, they’ll both cry and smile. Great noblemen will pause, shrug their shoulders in bewilderment, and wonder. Ladies will be frightened, happily frightened, and ask to hear more. The somber tribunes, who along with the moldy peasants hate it when you triumph, will say under their breath: “We thank the gods that Rome has a soldier like you.” But for you this victory was only like a small bite, since you had already had a feast of victory before."
"O general, Here is the steed, we the caparison:","Oh, general, Martius was like the horse, and we were only along for the ride. If you had seen—"
"Pray now, no more: my mother, Who has a charter to extol her blood, When she does praise me grieves me. I have done As you have done; that’s what I can; induced He that has but effected his good will Hath overta’en mine act.","Please, say no more. My mother, who has a right to praise me since I am her son, irritates me when she does so. I’ve done what you’ve done: I’ve done the best I can. I was trained as you were: to serve my country. Whoever who has done what he intended to do has accomplished more than I have."
"You shall not be The grave of your deserving; Rome must know Worse than a theft, no less than a traducement, To hide your doings; and to silence that, Which, to the spire and top of praises vouch’d, Would seem but modest: therefore, I beseech you What you have done—before our army hear me.","Don’t dismiss the praise you deserve. Rome must know your value as her soldier. To conceal your achievements would be worse than stealing, and not less than slander, because for what you have done, no matter how highly we praise you, it will never be sufficient. So I ask you—in recognition of your importance to Rome, not to boast of your achievements—let me address you in front of our army."
"I have some wounds upon me, and they smart To hear themselves remember’d.","I’m wounded, and my wounds hurt when they hear how I got them."
"Should they not, And tent themselves with death. Of all the horses, Whereof we have ta’en good and good store, of all The treasure in this field achieved and city, We render you the tenth, to be ta’en forth, Your only choice.","If your wounds don’t hear, they might think we’re ungrateful, become infected, and cause your death. Of all the many good horses we’ve taken from the enemy and of all the treasures we’ve won in the battlefield and in the city, we’ll give you one tenth to take now, before the rest is divided among us. Take whatever you choose."
"I thank you, general; But cannot make my heart consent to take A bribe to pay my sword: I do refuse it; That have beheld the doing.","Thank you, general, but my heart won’t to take a bribe to pay my sword. I refuse to stand there and listen to my deeds be told to those who saw me do them."
"May these same instruments, which you profane, Never sound more! when drums and trumpets shall I’ the field prove flatterers, let courts and cities be When steel grows soft as the parasite’s silk, Let him be made a coverture for the wars! No more, I say! For that I have not wash’d My nose that bled, or foil’d some debile wretch.— You shout me forth In acclamations hyperbolical; As if I loved my little should be dieted In praises sauced with lies.","May these instruments, which you play in the wrong moment, never make a sound again! If drums and trumpets could flatter the enemy into submission in battle, then we should build our courts and cities on their false praise! When steel grows soft as the diplomat’s silk, let us make an army of diplomats! Stop all this flattery! Because I haven’t washed my bloody nose or because I triumphed over some weakling—which, you fail to note, many others have done, too—you praise me in overstated terms, as if I enjoyed having my small achievements puffed up with exaggerations."
"More cruel to your good report than grateful To us that give you truly: by your patience, If ’gainst yourself you be incensed, we’ll put you, Like one that means his proper harm, in manacles, As to us, to all the world, that Caius Martius Wears this war’s garland: in token of the which, My noble steed, known to the camp, I give him, With all his trim belonging; and from this time, With all the applause and clamour of the host, CAIUS MARTIUS CORIOLANUS! Bear The addition nobly ever!","You’re too modest. You express more resentment about the praise we offer than you express gratitude for our true account of your service. Allow me to suggest that if you’re going to get upset, we’ll tie you up as we would someone suicidal and then reason with you. It must be known, not only to us but to all the world, that Caius Martius is the hero of this war. So I give you my magnificent horse, whose value is known to our men, and all his equipment. And from this time on, in honor of what you did in Corioles, you will be called, with all the applause and clamor you deserve, Caius Martius Coriolanus! Use this additional title nobly, always!"
Caius Martius Coriolanus!,Caius Martius Coriolanus!
"And when my face is fair, you shall perceive Whether I blush or no: howbeit, I thank you. I mean to stride your steed, and at all times To undercrest your good addition","I’ll go wash and when my face is clean, you’ll see whether or not I’m blushing. Thank you for this honor. I’ll ride your horse and try always to live up to this noble title you have given me."
"So, to our tent; Where, ere we do repose us, we will write To Rome of our success. You, Titus Lartius, Must to Corioli back: send us to Rome For their own good and ours.","Let’s go to our tent. Before we rest, we’ll write to Rome of our success. You, Titus Lartius, must go back to Corioles. Send us the best citizen of Corioles with whom we may negotiate a treaty, one that is fair to them and to us."
"I shall, my lord.","I will, my lord."
"The gods begin to mock me. I, that now Refused most princely gifts, am bound to beg","The gods begin to mock me. I, who just refused amazing gifts, must now beg something of you, my lord general."
Take’t; ’tis yours. What is’t?,Whatever you want is yours. What is it?
I sometime lay here in Corioli At a poor man’s house; he used me kindly: He cried to me; I saw him prisoner; And wrath o’erwhelm’d my pity: I request you To give my poor host freedom.,"When I was in Corioles, I stayed for some time in a poor man’s house. He treated me kindly, and now he’s a prisoner. He cried out for my help, but I was focused on Aufidius, and anger overwhelmed my pity. I request that you free my poor host."
"O, well begg’d! Were he the butcher of my son, he should","You’re persuasive! Even if he were the butcher of my son, he’d be as free as the wind. Release him, Titus."
"Martius, his name?","Martius, his name?"
"By Jupiter! forgot. I am weary; yea, my memory is tired. Have we no wine here?",By Jupiter! I’ve forgotten. I’m worn out and my memory is tired. Do we have any wine here?
The blood upon your visage dries; ’tis time It should be look’d to: come.,Let’s go our tent. The blood on your face is drying. It’s time you were looked at. Come.
The town is ta’en!,The town is taken!
’Twill be deliver’d back on good condition.,It’ll be given back with fair conditions.
"Condition! I would I were a Roman; for I cannot, What good condition can a treaty find I’ the part that is at mercy? Five times, Martius, I have fought with thee: so often hast thou beat me, And wouldst do so, I think, should we encounter If e’er again I meet him beard to beard, He’s mine, or I am his: mine emulation Hath not that honour in’t it had; for where I thought to crush him in an equal force, Or wrath or craft may get him.","Conditions! I wish I were a Roman, but I can’t be other than what I am: a Volsce. Conditions! Under what conditions can a treaty be fair to the side that has lost? I’ve fought Martius five times, and every time he has beaten me. And I think he would beat me again in the future if we met in battle as often as we eat. By the elements, if I ever see him face to face again, I’ll kill him or he’ll kill me. My desire to beat him isn’t as honorable as it once was, for while I once wanted to crush him with our forces being equal, fighting fairly sword to sword, but now I’ll stab him however I can and let either my anger or my trickery bring him down."
He’s the devil.,He’s the devil.
"Bolder, though not so subtle. My valour’s poison’d With only suffering stain by him; for him Being naked, sick, nor fane nor Capitol, The prayers of priests nor times of sacrifice, Embarquements all of fury, shall lift up Their rotten privilege and custom ’gainst At home, upon my brother’s guard, even there, Against the hospitable canon, would I Wash my fierce hand in’s heart. Go you to the city; Learn how ’tis held; and what they are that must","Bolder, but not as subtle. He’s the only one who has compromised my honor, and for that I will seek vengeance. Neither sleep nor sanctuary, nor being unarmed, nor sick, nor the constraints of the temple or the capitol, the prayers of priests or times of sacrifice, none of these obstacles to my fury will stop me from hating Martius. Wherever I find him, even at home in my brother’s protection, despite the law of hospitality, I’ll wash my fierce hand in his heart. Go to Corioles, find out how it’s being occupied and who’s been taken hostage by the Romans."
Will not you go?,You’re not going?
"I am attended at the cypress grove: I pray you— ’Tis south the city mills—bring me word thither How the world goes, that to the pace of it","They’re waiting for me at the cypress grove, south of the city mills. Please bring word to me there about how things are going so I can plan my journey accordingly."
"I shall, sir.","I will, sir."
The augurer tells me we shall have news to-night.,The fortuneteller tells me we’ll receive news tonight.
Good or bad?,Good news or bad?
"Not according to the prayer of the people, for they love not Martius.",Not the news people prayed for—they have no love for Martius.
Nature teaches beasts to know their friends.,"In nature, animals learn who their friends are."
"Pray you, who does the wolf love?","Tell me, who does the wolf love?"
The lamb.,The lamb.
"Ay, to devour him; as the hungry plebeians would the noble Martius.","Yes, to devour him, as the hungry citizens would love to devour the noble Martius."
"He’s a lamb indeed, that baes like a bear.","Martius is like a lamb, a lamb that roars like a bear."
"He’s a bear indeed, that lives like a lamb. You two are old men: tell me one thing that I shall ask you.","Martius is like a bear, a bear that lives like a lamb. You two have been around a long time, answer one question for me."
"Well, sir.","What do you want to know, sir?"
"In what enormity is Martius poor in, that you two",Tell me a quality that Martius lacks but that you two have in abundance.
"He’s poor in no one fault, but stored with all.",He doesn’t have just one fault—he has every fault.
Especially in pride.,Especially pride.
And topping all others in boasting.,"And boasting, above all."
This is strange now: do you two know how you are right-hand file? do you?,One thing is strange though. Do you two know how you are regarded by the nobles of the city? Do you?
"Why, how are we censured?",How are we seen?
"Because you talk of pride now,—will you not be angry?","Because you talk of pride now, won’t you get angry if I tell you?"
"Well, well, sir, well.","No, not at all, sir."
"occasion will rob you of a great deal of patience: give your dispositions the reins, and be angry at your pleasures; at the least if you take it as a pleasure to you in being so. You blame Martius for","Well, it doesn’t take much. Even the slightest incident will cause you to lose your patience and let your disposition take over. You become angry at what you should have enjoyed, and your only enjoyment comes from being angry. And yet you blame Martius for being proud?"
"We do it not alone, sir.","We’re not alone in our opinion, sir."
"I know you can do very little alone; for your helps are many, or else your actions would grow wondrous single: your abilities are too infant-like for could turn your eyes toward the napes of your necks, and make but an interior survey of your good selves! O that you could!","I know you can do very little alone. Without all the help you get, your actions would be totally insignificant. Your abilities aren’t strong enough for you to do much on your own. You talk of pride. If only you could see yourselves as you really are! I wish you could!"
"What then, sir?","And what if we could, sir?"
"proud, violent, testy magistrates, alias fools, as any in Rome.","You’d see that you are equal to all the other unqualified, proud, violent, testy government officials—in other words, fools—in Rome."
"Menenius, you are known well enough too.","Menenius, you have a bad reputation, too."
"I am known to be a humorous patrician, and one that Tiber in’t; said to be something imperfect in favouring the first complaint; hasty and tinder-like upon too trivial motion; one that converses more with the buttock of the night than with the forehead malice in my breath. Meeting two such wealsmen as you are—I cannot call you Lycurguses—if the drink you give me touch my palate adversely, I make a crooked face at it. I can’t say your worships have compound with the major part of your syllables: and though I must be content to bear with those that say you are reverend grave men, yet they lie deadly that tell you you have good faces. If you see this in well enough too? what barm can your bisson conspectuities glean out of this character, if I be known well enough too?","I’m known as a moody aristocrat, and one that loves a cup of hot wine not diluted by even a drop of water from the Tiber River. I’m said to be somewhat flawed as a judge because I’m hastily swayed by the first argument I hear. I’m quick to anger at the slightest disturbance. I stay up late at night and don’t rise early in the morning. I say whatever I think and express my anger when I speak. Meeting two statesmen such as yourselves—I cannot call you lawmakers—if I don’t like the drink you give me, I make a crooked face at it. I don’t think you deserve the respectful titles of your profession, when I find most of what you say to be asinine. And though I can tolerate those that say you are respectable, serious men, the ones who say you are honest are deadly liars. If you see these same qualities in me, doesn’t it make sense that I’m known for my bad qualities? What harm can your misperceptions do to my character, if I already have a bad reputation?"
"Come, sir, come, we know you well enough.","That’s enough, sir. We know your reputation well."
"are ambitious for poor knaves’ caps and legs: you wear out a good wholesome forenoon in hearing a cause between an orange wife and a fosset-seller; and then rejourn the controversy of three pence to a matter between party and party, if you chance to be pinched with the colic, you make faces like mummers; set up the bloody flag against all patience; and, in roaring for a chamber-pot, by your hearing: all the peace you make in their cause is, calling both the parties knaves. You are a pair of strange ones.","You don’t know anything about me, or about yourselves. Your ambition is to have poor citizens take off their hats and bow down to you. You’ll waste a whole morning listening to a dispute over three pence between an orange vendor and a wine tap seller and then postpone settling the issue until the next day. When you’re hearing a matter between two parties, if you’re feeling the tiniest bit sick, you become very dramatic: you violently refuse to be patient and, demanding a chamber pot, dismiss the controversy, leaving it even more entangled as a result of your hearing it. The only justice you show is in calling both parties scoundrels. You’re a pair of strange men."
"Come, come, you are well understood to be a bencher in the Capitol.","Come, come. You’re well known to be a better dinner-table conversationalist than a serious judge."
"Our very priests must become mockers, if they shall encounter such ridiculous subjects as you are. When you speak best unto the purpose, it is not worth the so honourable a grave as to stuff a botcher’s cushion, or to be entombed in an ass’s pack- saddle. Yet you must be saying, Martius is proud; who in a cheap estimation, is worth predecessors best of ’em were hereditary hangmen. God-den to your worships: more of your conversation would infect my brain, being the herdsmen of the beastly plebeians: I will be bold to take my leave of you.","Even our priests would become mockers if they encountered anyone as ridiculous as you. When you stay on topic, what you say isn’t worth the wagging of your beards. And your beards don’t even deserve the honorable burial of being stuffed in a seamstress’s cushion or being entombed in the pack saddle of a donkey. You say Martius is proud, but even guessing conservatively, he’s worth all your predecessors since Deucalion, who survived the flood, even though some of them may have been hangmen. Good evening to you both. To keep talking with you would infect my brain, since you are the herdsmen of the beastly common people. I must go."
"were she earthly, no nobler,—whither do you follow your eyes so fast?","How are you, my dear noble ladies? You are like the moon on earth—what are you looking at?"
"Honourable Menenius, my boy Martius approaches; for the love of Juno, let’s go.","Honorable Menenius, my son Martius approaches. For the love of Juno, let’s go."
Ha! Martius coming home!,What? Martius is coming home?
"Ay, worthy Menenius; and with most prosperous approbation.","Yes, worthy Menenius, and he’s proudly victorious."
"Take my cap, Jupiter, and I thank thee. Hoo! Martius coming home!","I take my hat off in thanks to you, Jupiter, king of the gods. Hoo! Martius is coming home!"
"Nay, ’tis true.","Yes, it’s true."
"another, his wife another; and, I think, there’s one at home for you.","Look, here’s a letter from him. He sent another to the Senate and another to his wife. I think there’s one at home for you."
I will make my very house reel tonight: a letter for me!,My household will be thrilled tonight. A letter for me!
"Yes, certain, there’s a letter for you; I saw’t.","Yes, I’m certain there’s a letter for you. I saw it."
"A letter for me! it gives me an estate of seven years’ health; in which time I will make a lip at the physician: the most sovereign prescription in Galen is but empiricutic, and, to this preservative, not wounded? he was wont to come home wounded.","A letter for me! It makes me live seven years longer, and all the while I’ll laugh at my doctor. The most well-established prescription according to the great doctor Galen is nothing but an experimental cure, and compared to this news, it’s worth no more than horse medicine. Is he wounded? He was likely to come home wounded."
"O, no, no, no.","Oh, no, no, no."
"O, he is wounded; I thank the gods for’t.","Oh, yes, he’s wounded, and I thank the gods for it."
"So do I too, if it be not too much: brings a’","As do I, if he’s not wounded too much. If he brings home victory, the wounds are appropriate."
"On’s brows: Menenius, he comes the third time home with the oaken garland.","He’s wounded on his forehead. Menenius, this is the third time he’s come home with the garland of oak."
Has he disciplined Aufidius soundly?,Has he thoroughly beaten Aufidius?
"Titus Lartius writes, they fought together, but","Titus Lartius writes that they fought each other, but Aufidius got away."
"And ’twas time for him too, I’ll warrant him that: an he had stayed by him, I would not have been so fidiused for all the chests in Corioli, and the gold that’s in them. Is the senate possessed of this?","It was Aufidius’s time to die. For all the chests in Corioles and the gold that’s in them, I bet that if Martius had captured him, he would’ve gotten the beating he deserved. Does the Senate know about this?"
"has letters from the general, wherein he gives my son the whole name of the war: he hath in this action outdone his former deeds doubly","Good ladies, let’s go. Yes, yes, yes! Cominius has written to the Senate and named my son responsible for the victory. His accomplishments in this war are double all his past deeds."
"In troth, there’s wondrous things spoke of him.","It’s true, there are wonderful things said about him."
true purchasing.,"Wonderful! Yes, it’s true, and none that he didn’t earn."
The gods grant them true!,"Oh, gods, may these words be true!"
"True! pow, wow.",True? Pooh-whoo!
True! I’ll be sworn they are true.,True? I promise they’re true. Where is he wounded?
God save your good worships! Martius is coming home: he has more cause to be proud. Where is he wounded?,"May you be well, good sirs! Martius is coming home. He has new reasons to be proud. (to Volumnia) Where is he wounded?"
"I’ the shoulder and i’ the left arm there will be large cicatrices to show the people, when he shall Tarquin seven hurts i’ the body.","In the shoulder and in the left arm. There will be large scars to show the people, when he stands to receive his place as consul. When he defeated the king Tarquin, he was wounded seven times."
"One i’ the neck, and two i’ the thigh,—there’s nine that I know.",Once in the neck and twice in the thigh. There are nine wounds that I know of.
"He had, before this last expedition, twenty-five","Before this last expedition, he had twenty-five wounds in total."
Now it’s twenty-seven: every gash was an enemy’s grave.,Now it’s twenty-seven. Every gash represents an enemy who has died.
Hark! the trumpets.,Hark! The trumpets.
"These are the ushers of Martius: before him he carries noise, and behind him he leaves tears: Which, being advanced, declines, and then men die.","These men walk ahead of Martius to introduce him. Many cheers welcome him, and he leaves behind many tears. Death, that dark spirit, lies within his strong arm. When he raises his arm, it comes down upon his enemies and they die."
"Know, Rome, that all alone Martius did fight Within Corioli gates: where he hath won, With fame, a name to Caius Martius; these Welcome to Rome, renowned Coriolanus!","Romans, let it be known that Martius fought all alone within Corioles’s gates. There he won, along with honor, a new name. The name “Coriolanus” now respectfully follows “Caius Martius.” Welcome to Rome, the renowned Coriolanus!"
"Welcome to Rome, renowned Coriolanus!","Welcome to Rome, renowned Coriolanus!"
"No more of this; it does offend my heart: Pray now, no more.","No more praise. I don’t like it. Please now, no more."
"Look, sir, your mother!","Look, sir, your mother!"
"O, You have, I know, petition’d all the gods For my prosperity!","You have, I know, begged all the gods to grant me victory!"
"Nay, my good soldier, up; By deed-achieving honour newly named,— What is it?—Coriolanus must I call thee?— But O, thy wife!","No, my good soldier, get up. My gentle Martius, worthy Caius, and through your honor achieved by your actions, newly named—what is it?—Coriolanus must I call thee? (Coriolanus rises) But oh, your wife!"
"My gracious silence, hail! That weep’st to see me triumph? Ay, my dear, Such eyes the widows in Corioli wear, And mothers that lack sons.","There you are, my lovely silent wife! Would you have laughed if I had come home in a coffin, since you are crying to see me come home in victory? Ah, my dear, your eyes look like the widows and the mothers who have lost sons in Corioles."
"Now, the gods crown thee!","Now, the gods crown you!"
"(To VALERIA) O my sweet lady, pardon.","Are you still alive? (to Valeria) I’m sorry, my sweet lady."
"I know not where to turn: O, welcome home: And welcome, general: and ye’re welcome all.","I don’t know where to turn. Oh, welcome home! And welcome, general! Welcome all!"
"A hundred thousand welcomes. I could weep A curse begin at very root on’s heart, That is not glad to see thee! You are three That Rome should dote on: yet, by the faith of men, We have some old crab-trees here Be grafted to your relish. Yet welcome, warriors: We call a nettle but a nettle and The faults of fools but folly.","A hundred thousand welcomes. I could weep and I could laugh. I’m happy and sad. Welcome. May a curse reach to the very root of anyone’s heart who isn’t happy to see you! Rome should honor you as it would three men. However, we have some bitter old men here who refuse to applaud you. But welcome, warriors! Some things just are what they are, and fools don’t understand."
Ever right.,You’re right.
"Menenius ever, ever.","You’re always right, Menenius."
"Give way there, and go on!",Make way. Keep walking.
"[To VOLUMNIA and VIRGILIA] Your hand, and yours: Ere in our own house I do shade my head, The good patricians must be visited; But with them change of honours.","(to Volumnia and Virgilia) Give me your hands. Before I can go home and rest, I must visit the nobles because they haven’t only welcomed me back but have also honored me with this new name."
I have lived To see inherited my very wishes And the buildings of my fancy: only Our Rome will cast upon thee.,"I’ve lived to see all my wishes come true and to possess all the things I wanted. Now there’s only one thing left, which I’m sure that Rome will give you."
"Know, good mother, I had rather be their servant in my way, Than sway with them in theirs.","Mother, you know I’d prefer to serve the senators as a soldier than to be a public servant myself."
"On, to the Capitol!",Let’s go the capitol!
"All tongues speak of him, and the bleared sights Are spectacled to see him: your prattling nurse Into a rapture lets her baby cry While she chats him: the kitchen malkin pins Clambering the walls to eye him: stalls, bulks, windows, Are smother’d up, leads fill’d, and ridges horsed With variable complexions, all agreeing In earnestness to see him: seld-shown flamens To win a vulgar station: or veil’d dames Commit the war of white and damask in Their nicely-gawded cheeks to the wanton spoil Of Phoebus’ burning kisses: such a pother Were slily crept into his human powers And gave him graceful posture.","Everyone is talking about him. People who are nearly blind wear glasses just to see him. Babbling nurses let babies cry in a tantrum while they talk about him. The kitchen maid pins her best linen around her dirty neck and climbs up the wall to see him. Storefronts are boarded up, leaden roofs covered over and all different types of people are riding their horses on top of the roofs, all trying to see him. Priests who rarely come out in public are mixed in with the common people and struggle to find a place in the crowd. Women who usually wear veils are letting their pale cheeks get sunburned. There is such mayhem that it seems like whichever god is guiding Martius has taken over his very body and given him a godly way of being."
"On the sudden, I warrant him consul.",It seems like he may become a member of the consul.
"During his power, go sleep.",We’d lose power if he were admitted to the consul.
"He cannot temperately transport his honours From where he should begin and end, but will Lose those he hath won.","He won’t be able to translate his fame in battle into some other kind of victory. If he tries, he’ll lose the honor he has won."
In that there’s comfort.,That’s comforting.
"Doubt not The commoners, for whom we stand, but they Upon their ancient malice will forget With the least cause these his new honours, which As he is proud to do’t.","Don’t doubt the common people we represent. Their longstanding hatred for him will cause them to overlook his new honors with only the slightest provocation. And given his pride, he’ll undoubtedly provoke them."
"I heard him swear, Were he to stand for consul, never would he Appear i’ the market-place nor on him put Nor showing, as the manner is, his wounds To the people, beg their stinking breaths.","I heard him declare that if he were to seek nomination to the consul, he would never appear in the marketplace wearing the traditional poor man’s gown to show his humility. Nor would he show off his wounds to the people to win their approval."
’Tis right.,Is that so?
"It was his word: O, he would miss it rather And the desire of the nobles.",He said he’d rather not be in the consul if he couldn’t be admitted simply by the wishes of the middle class and the nobles.
I wish no better Than have him hold that purpose and to put it In execution.,I hope he stays with that plan.
’Tis most like he will.,"Most likely, he will."
"It shall be to him then as our good wills, A sure destruction.",What will happen to him then will be as we wish: he’ll surely lose.
"So it must fall out To him or our authorities. For an end, He still hath held them; that to’s power he would Have made them mules, silenced their pleaders and Dispropertied their freedoms, holding them, In human action and capacity, Than camels in the war, who have their provand Only for bearing burdens, and sore blows For sinking under them.","He must lose, or else our power will be over. We must remind the people of how much he still hates them, that if he were in charge, he’d make them work like mules, he would never listen to their requests and he’d take away their freedoms. He wouldn’t recognize their humanity or their souls. He’d hold them captive like the camels who only get fed so that they can carry heavy loads in service of the war and develop sores in the process."
"This, as you say, suggested Shall touch the people—which time shall not want, If he be put upon ’t; and that’s as easy As to set dogs on sheep—will be his fire To kindle their dry stubble; and their blaze","We need to suggest this possibility to the people at a time when they’re already irritated by his arrogance. There will be many occasions for this. It’s as easy to get him to show off his pride as it is to get dogs to chase sheep. His pride will be like fire to their kindling wood, and their blaze will ruin him forever."
What’s the matter?,What’s going on?
"You are sent for to the Capitol. ’Tis thought That Martius shall be consul: I have seen the dumb men throng to see him and Ladies and maids their scarfs and handkerchers, Upon him as he pass’d: the nobles bended, As to Jove’s statue, and the commons made A shower and thunder with their caps and shouts:","The capitol sends for you. It’s thought that Martius will be admitted to the consul. I saw mute people form crowds to see him and blind people to hear him speak. Married women threw their gloves to him and ladies and maids their scarfs and handkerchiefs. As he passed by, the nobles bowed to him as they would to Jupiter’s statue. The common people made a shower with their caps and thunder with their shouts. I’ve never seen anything like it."
"Let’s to the Capitol; And carry with us ears and eyes for the time, But hearts for the event.","Let’s go to the Capitol and keep our eyes and ears open for the time being, while our heart remains set on our plan."
Have with you.,I’m with you.
"Come, come, they are almost here. How many stand for consulships?",Hurry up. They’re almost here. How many are being considered for the consul?
"Three, they say: but ’tis thought of every one Coriolanus will carry it.","Three, they say. But everyone thinks Coriolanus will get it."
loves not the common people.,"He’s a brave man, but he’s too proud, and he doesn’t care about the common people."
"Faith, there had been many great men that have flattered the people, who ne’er loved them; and there be many that they have loved, they know not they hate upon no better a ground: therefore, for Coriolanus neither to care whether they love or hate him manifests the true knowledge he has in their disposition; and out of his noble carelessness lets","There have been many great men who have flattered the people but whom the people never liked, and there have been many that the people liked for unknown reasons. Since they can like someone without knowing why, at least when they dislike someone, it’s for an equally vague reason. So for Coriolanus not to care whether they like him or not shows that he actually knows them quite well, and out of his own indifference to public opinion, he lets them know that he doesn’t care."
"If he did not care whether he had their love or no, he waved indifferently ’twixt doing them neither good nor harm: but he seeks their hate with greater devotion than can render it him; and leaves opposite. Now, to seem to affect the malice and displeasure of the people is as bad as that which he dislikes, to flatter them for their love.","If he didn’t care whether or not he had their support, he would be indifferent to either doing them good or harm. But he provokes their hatred with more intensity than they can they can hate him with in return. He has done everything possible for them to see him as their enemy. However, to pretend to desire the ill will of the people is as bad as flattering them for their approval—something he would never do."
"He hath deserved worthily of his country: and his having been supple and courteous to the people, bonneted, without any further deed to have them at all into their estimation and report: but he hath so planted his honours in their eyes, and his actions silent, and not confess so much, were a kind of ingrateful injury; to report otherwise, were a malice, that, giving itself the lie, would pluck reproof and rebuke from every ear that heard it.","He has served his country honorably and his route to prominence has not been nearly as easy as those who, having been lenient and kind to the people, only tipped their hats to get ahead. But he has boasted in their faces so much about his fame and his actions, that if they don’t pay attention to this, they would be harming themselves. If they lie about his prideful behavior, no one would believe them. Everyone would say otherwise."
are coming.,Stop talking about him. He’s a worthy man. Make way. They’re coming.
"Having determined of the Volsces and To send for Titus Lartius, it remains, As the main point of this our after-meeting, Hath thus stood for his country: therefore, please you, Most reverend and grave elders, to desire The present consul, and last general A little of that worthy work perform’d By Caius Martius Coriolanus, whom We met here both to thank and to remember With honours like himself. (Coriolanus sits)","Once we decide what to do about the Volsces and send for Titus Lartius, the main point of this meeting is still to reward his noble service in defending his country. Therefore, most respected and honorable elders, the present consul and the general in our victorious battles desires to report a little of the worthy work performed by Caius Martius Coriolanus, whom we have invited here both to thank and to honor. (Coriolanus sits)"
"Leave nothing out for length, and make us think Rather our state’s defective for requital Than we to stretch it out. (To the Tribunes) We do request your kindest ears, and after, Your loving motion toward the common body, To yield what passes here.","Speak as long as you need, good Cominius. Leave nothing out. Better that he think we don’t have the resources to reward to him than that we don’t have the patience to listen to the full report. (to the tribunes) Representatives of the people, we request you to listen kindly, and afterward to convince the people to agree to what we suggest."
We are convented Inclinable to honour and advance The theme of our assembly.,"We’ve come here to consider this question, and we’re inclined to honor and advance the cause of our constituents."
"Which the rather We shall be blest to do, if he remember He hath hereto prized them at.","Which we’ll happily do, and soon, if he can remember to value the people more highly than he has previously."
"That’s off, that’s off; I would you rather had been silent. Please you To hear Cominius speak?","That’s not the point. I wish you had been silent. Please, will you let Cominius speak?"
But yet my caution was more pertinent Than the rebuke you give it.,Most willingly. But my caution was more important than you realize.
He loves your people But tie him not to be their bedfellow.,"He cares about the common people. Just don’t expect him to be closely involved with them. Worthy Cominius, speak."
"Nay, keep your place.","No, stay where you are."
"Sit, Coriolanus; never shame to hear What you have nobly done.","Sit, Coriolanus. Never be embarrassed to hear of your noble deeds."
Your horror’s pardon: Than hear say how I got them.,"I’m sorry, your honor. I’d rather let my wounds heal than hear how I got them."
"Sir, I hope My words disbench’d you not.","Sir, I hope my words didn’t cause you to get up."
"No, sir: yet oft, You soothed not, therefore hurt not: but your people, I love them as they weigh.","No, sir. While I don’t run from fights, I do often run from praise. But you didn’t flatter me, so I wasn’t offended. But the people you represent are worth so little, so I care so little about them."
"Pray now, sit down.","Please, sit down."
When the alarum were struck than idly sit To hear my nothings monster’d.,I’d rather let someone scratch my head in the sun when the trumpet summons me to battle than sit here and listen to my small deeds be over-embellished.
"Masters of the people, Your multiplying spawn how can he flatter— He had rather venture all his limbs for honour Than one on’s ears to hear it? Proceed, Cominius.","Representatives of the people, your constituents reproduce all the time, and there’s only one good man among every thousand of them—how can he flatter them? You see now he’d rather risk his whole life for honor than risk one of his ears to hear about it. Go on, Cominius."
"I shall lack voice: the deeds of Coriolanus Should not be utter’d feebly. It is held Most dignifies the haver: if it be, The man I speak of cannot in the world Be singly counterpoised. At sixteen years, When Tarquin made a head for Rome, he fought Whom with all praise I point at, saw him fight, When with his Amazonian chin he drove The bristled lips before him: be bestrid An o’er-press’d Roman and i’ the consul’s view And struck him on his knee: in that day’s feats, When he might act the woman in the scene, He proved best man i’ the field, and for his meed Was brow-bound with the oak. His pupil age And in the brunt of seventeen battles since He lurch’d all swords of the garland. For this last, Before and in Corioli, let me say, I cannot speak him home: he stopp’d the fliers; Turn terror into sport: as weeds before A vessel under sail, so men obey’d And fell below his stem: his sword, death’s stamp, Where it did mark, it took; from face to foot Was timed with dying cries: alone he enter’d The mortal gate of the city, which he painted With shunless destiny; aidless came off, And with a sudden reinforcement struck When, by and by, the din of war gan pierce His ready sense; then straight his doubled spirit Re-quicken’d what in flesh was fatigate, And to the battle came he; where he did Both field and city ours, he never stood To ease his breast with panting.","I won’t say much. The deeds of Coriolanus shouldn’t be spoken of lightly. It’s well known that courage is the highest virtue and brings the highest dignity to whoever has it. And if that’s true, there’s no one in the world who is more dignified than the man I speak of. At age sixteen, when Tarquin attacked Rome, his fighting exceeded everyone else’s. Our former leader, whom I reference with all praise, saw him fight victoriously against adults when he was still young and had a beardless chin. He protected the overwhelmed Romans and as the consul watched, he defeated three enemies. He fought Tarquin himself and brought him to his knees. In that day of fighting, when he was young enough to play a woman on stage, he proved to be the best man in the field, and he was rewarded with a garland of oak. He entered into manhood, though he was still a boy, with the force of a rising tide. He has led the attack in seventeen battles since then, and he has won the garland over his fellow soldiers every time. As for this last battle, outside of and within Corioles, I have no words to describe what he did. He stopped the Roman deserters and by his rare example made these cowards overcome their fear and become warriors. The men obeyed and fell beneath his prow like waves beneath a sailboat. Wherever he swung his sword, he marked the sign of death. From head to toe he was covered in blood, and his every motion was followed by dying cries. He entered the deadly gate of the city alone, and he painted it with the blood of their inevitable destiny. Without help, he retreated, but with a sudden burst of energy he attacked Corioles with the force of a planet. Then the city was all his. After a while, as the noise of war began to wear him down, his spirit reinvigorated his tired body, and he came back to the battle and ran furiously at the enemy, as if it were an endless slaughter. He never stopped to catch his breath until both the field and city were ours."
Worthy man!,Worthy man!
He cannot but with measure fit the honours,He definitely measures up to the honors we have for him.
"Our spoils he kick’d at, And look’d upon things precious as they were The common muck of the world: he covets less Than misery itself would give; rewards To spend the time to end it.","He rejected our spoils and looked at precious things as if they were the common muck of the world. He doesn’t desire anything. To him, doing his deeds is its own reward, and he’s happy to spend the time to do the job well."
He’s right noble: Let him be call’d for.,He’s very noble. Let’s call him here.
Call Coriolanus.,Call Coriolanus.
He doth appear.,Here he is.
"The senate, Coriolanus, are well pleased To make thee consul.","Coriolanus, the Senate is very happy to admit you to the consul."
I do owe them still My life and services.,I’ll always owe them my life and services.
That you do speak to the people.,All that remains is for you to speak to the people.
"I do beseech you, Let me o’erleap that custom, for I cannot Put on the gown, stand naked and entreat them, That I may pass this doing.","I beg you, let me skip that custom. I can’t put on the gown, stand without an undershirt, and show off my wounds just so they’ll vote for me. Please let me pass on doing this."
"Sir, the people Must have their voices; neither will they bate One jot of ceremony.","Sir, the people must have their say, and they won’t leave out one bit of the ceremony."
"Pray you, go fit you to the custom and Take to you, as your predecessors have, Your honour with your form.",Don’t fight them on this. Go through with this custom and stand honorably as your predecessors have.
It is apart Be taken from the people.,I’ll blush as I play this part. The people will be deceived.
(to Sicinius) Mark you that?,(to Sicinius) Did you hear that?
"To brag unto them, thus I did, and thus; Show them the unaching scars which I should hide, Of their breath only!","To brag of the things I’ve done and show them my old scars, which I should hide—as if I’d received them only for the people to gasp at!"
"Do not stand upon’t. We recommend to you, tribunes of the people, Our purpose to them: and to our noble consul","Don’t insist on this. Tribunes of the people, we ask that you recommend our proposal to the people. And to our noble consul wish we all joy and honor."
To Coriolanus come all joy and honour!,May all joy and honor come to Coriolanus!
You see how he intends to use the people.,You see how he intends to use the people.
"May they perceive’s intent! He will require them, As if he did contemn what he requested",May they know his intentions! He’ll ask for their support even though he hates that it’s in their power to give it.
"Come, we’ll inform them Of our proceedings here: on the marketplace, I know, they do attend us.",Let’s go inform them of what’s happened here. I know they’re waiting for us in the marketplace.
"Once, if he do require our voices, we ought not to deny him.","If and when he asks for our votes, we shouldn’t deny him."
"We may, sir, if we will.","We can deny him, sir, if we want to."
"We have power in ourselves to do it, but it is a power that we have no power to do; for if he show us tongues into those wounds and speak for them; so, if he tell us his noble deeds, we must also tell him our noble acceptance of them. Ingratitude is monstrous, and for the multitude to be ingrateful, which we being members, should bring ourselves to be monstrous members.","We have the right to deny him, but it wouldn’t be the right thing to do. If he shows us his wounds and tells us of his deeds, we must honor those wounds with our votes. And if he tells us of his noble deeds, we must then tell him of our gratitude. Ingratitude is monstrous, and for the people to be seen as ungrateful would make us into monsters."
"And to make us no better thought of, a little help will serve; for once we stood up about the corn, he","And it wouldn’t take much to make us worse thought of. When we complained about the corn, he didn’t hesitate to call us an unstable mass of people."
"We have been called so of many; not that our heads are some brown, some black, some auburn, some bald, but that our wits are so diversely coloured: and truly I think if all our wits were to issue out of and their consent of one direct way should be at once to all the points o’ the compass.","Many people have called us that. Not because some of us have brown hair, some black, some blond and some bald, but because our opinions are so diverse. I truly think that if all our opinions were to come from one mind, they would go east, west, north, and south. All they could agree on would be to go in different directions."
Think you so? Which way do you judge my wit would fly?,Do you think so? Which way do you think my opinion would go?
"will; ’tis strongly wedged up in a block-head, but if it were at liberty, ’twould, sure, southward.","You’re stubborn, so your opinion will stay stuck inside you until another man’s will expresses itself first. If yours could come out, though, it would surely go south."
Why that way?,Why that way?
"To lose itself in a fog, where being three parts for conscience sake, to help to get thee a wife.","To lose itself in the plague-ridden air. Three-quarters of it would melt away in the contagious dew, and the remaining quarter would have a conscience and return to help you get a wife."
"You are never without your tricks: you may, you may.",You’re never without your jokes. It’s okay—you can laugh at me.
"Are you all resolved to give your voices? But that’s no matter, the greater part carries it. I never a worthier man.","Are you all ready to vote? It doesn’t actually matter, since the majority vote wins. If only he cared about the people, he would be the most deserving man there ever was."
"Here he comes, and in the gown of humility: mark his behavior. We are not to stay all together, but to come by him where he stands, by ones, by twos, and particulars; wherein every one of us has a single honour, in giving him our own voices with our own tongues: therefore follow me, and I direct you how you shall go by him. Content, content.","Here he comes, wearing the gown of humility. Watch his behavior. We’re not supposed to all stay together but rather go up to him where he’s standing, either alone or in groups of two or three. He’s supposed to make his request to us individually, and each of us has the separate honor of giving him our own vote in our voice. Follow me. I’ll show you how to go up to him. ALL Okay, okay."
"O sir, you are not right: have you not known The worthiest men have done’t?","Oh, sir, you don’t understand. Don’t you know that the most honorable men have done this?"
"What must I say? My tongue to such a pace:—‘Look, sir, my wounds! I got them in my country’s service, when Some certain of your brethren roar’d and ran From the noise of our own drums.’","What am I supposed to say? “Please, sir”—Curse that! I can’t force myself to say such a thing. “Look at my wounds, sir. I got them while serving my country, while men who were undoubtedly your brothers cried and ran away from the battle.”"
You must not speak of that: you must desire them To think upon you.,"Oh, gods! You can’t talk about that. You need to get them to think well of you."
"Think upon me! hang ’em! I would they would forget me, like the virtues","Think well of me! Hang them! I wish they would forget me, like they have forgotten the virtues that the gods didn’t sufficiently instill in them."
"You’ll mar all: I’ll leave you: pray you, speak to ’em, I pray you, In wholesome manner.","You’ll ruin everything. I’m leaving now. Please, keep it clean with them."
Bid them wash their faces,I’ll ask them to wash their faces and brush their teeth.
"So, here comes a brace.","So, here comes a pair."
"You know the cause, air, of my standing here.",You know why I’m standing here.
"We do, sir; tell us what hath brought you to’t.","We do, sir. Tell us what brought you here."
Mine own desert.,It’s what I deserve.
Your own desert!,It’s what you deserve!
"Ay, but not mine own desire.","Yes, but it’s not what I desire."
How not your own desire?,You don’t desire it?
"No, sir,’twas never my desire yet to trouble the poor with begging.","No, sir, I never desired to trouble the poor with begging."
gain by you.,"You must think that if we give you something, we hope to get something from you."
"Well then, I pray, your price o’ the consulship?","Well then, tell me: what will it cost for you to give me the consulship?"
The price is to ask it kindly.,The price is to ask for it kindly.
"Kindly! Sir, I pray, let me ha’t: I have wounds to good voice, sir; what say you?","Please, sir, kindly let me have it. I have wounds to show you, which I’ll show you in private. Your vote, sir, what do you say?"
"You shall ha’ it, worthy sir.","You’ll get my vote, worthy sir."
"A match, sir. There’s in all two worthy voices begged. I have your alms: adieu.","It’s a deal, sir. That’s two deserving votes I’ve secured. Thank you your charity. Goodbye."
But this is something odd.,(to the other Citizens) This is strange.
"An ’twere to give again,--but ’tis no matter.","If I could vote again, but never mind."
"Pray you now, if it may stand with the tune of your voices that I may be consul, I have here the customary gown.","I ask if you would please vote for me, since I am wearing the customary gown."
have not deserved nobly.,"You’ve served your country nobly, but you aren’t deserving."
Your enigma?,What do you mean?
"You have been a scourge to her enemies, you have been a rod to her friends; you have not indeed loved","You’ve defeated her enemies and you’ve protected her friends, but you haven’t loved the common people."
"You should account me the more virtuous that I have not been common in my love. I will, sir, flatter my sworn brother, the people, to earn a dearer estimation of them; ’tis a condition they account rather to have my hat than my heart, I will practise the insinuating nod and be off to them most counterfeitly; that is, sir, I will counterfeit the bewitchment of some popular man and give it I may be consul.","You should consider me virtuous because I don’t give my love away easily. Sir, I’ll flatter my sworn brothers, the people, so they’ll think well of me. It’s a custom they consider noble. And since they’d rather decide based on what hat I’m wearing than on who I am, I’ll practice taking off my hat and bowing insincerely. That is to say, sir, I’ll pretend to be enchanted by them, as some popular men do, and give my false admiration plentifully to those who desire it. So I ask you, may I be consul?"
We hope to find you our friend; and therefore give you our voices heartily.,"We hope you’ll be our ally, so we happily vote for you."
You have received many wounds for your country.,You’ve been wounded many times serving your country.
"will make much of your voices, and so trouble you no further.",I won’t confirm what you already know by showing my wounds to you. I’ll just take your votes and not trouble you further.
"The gods give you joy, sir, heartily!","May the gods give you much joy, sir!"
"Most sweet voices! Better it is to die, better to starve, Why in this woolvish toge should I stand here, To beg of Hob and Dick, that do appear, Their needless vouches? Custom calls me to’t: What custom wills, in all things should we do’t, And mountainous error be too highly heapt For truth to o’er-peer. Rather than fool it so, Let the high office and the honour go To one that would do thus. I am half through;","Most sweet voters! It’s better to die, better to starve, than to beg to be chosen for a position you already deserve. Why must I stand here in this hypocritical toga and beg the commoners for their meaningless approval, which I shouldn’t need? Custom forces me to do it, and what custom requires, we must do. It’s an ancient tradition that has gone on for so long that no one can see that it’s a huge mistake. I wish I didn’t have to play the fool, but the honor of the consulship goes to he who will. I’m halfway done. I’ll do the other half."
"Here come more voices. Your voices: for your voices I have fought; Watch’d for your voices; for your voices bear Of wounds two dozen odd; battles thrice six Done many things, some less, some more your voices: Indeed I would be consul.","Here come more votes. Your votes: I have fought for your votes and stayed out on watch for your votes. For your votes I have been wounded more than two dozen times and been in thirty-six battles. For your votes, I have seen and heard many things and done some things less and some things more—all for your votes, so I can be in the consul."
"He has done nobly, and cannot go without any honest man’s voice.",He has served nobly and must win any honest man’s vote.
and make him good friend to the people!,Therefore let him be the consul. May the gods give him joy and make him be good to the people!
"Amen, amen. God save thee, noble consul!","Amen, amen. God save thee, noble consul"
Worthy voices!,Worthy voters!
"You have stood your limitation; and the tribunes That, in the official marks invested, you Anon do meet the senate.","You’ve stood here for the time required, and the tribunes approve you with the people’s endorsement. All that remains is to make it official. We must go now to the senators."
Is this done?,It’s over?
"The custom of request you have discharged: To meet anon, upon your approbation.","You’ve done the required custom, and the people admit you to the consul. Go meet the senators so they can approve your election."
Where? at the senate-house?,Where? At the Senate house?
"There, Coriolanus.","Yes, Coriolanus."
May I change these garments?,May I change out of these clothes?
"You may, sir.","You may, sir."
"That I’ll straight do; and, knowing myself again, Repair to the senate-house.","I’ll do that first, and once I feel like myself again, I’ll go to the Senate house."
I’ll keep you company. Will you along?,"I’ll keep you company. Will you come, too?"
We stay here for the people.,We’ll stay here with the people.
Fare you well.,Good luck.
"He has it now, and by his looks methink ’Tis warm at ’s heart.","He has the consulship now, and he looks happy about it."
With a proud heart he wore his humble weeds. will you dismiss the people?,"He wore the gown of humility, but his heart was still proud. Will you let the people’s vote stand?"
"How now, my masters! have you chose this man?","How are you, good people? Have you chosen this man?"
"He has our voices, sir.","He has our votes, sir."
We pray the gods he may deserve your loves.,We pray to the gods that he deserves your favor.
"Amen, sir: to my poor unworthy notice, He mock’d us when he begg’d our voices.","Amen, sir. I’m not certain, but I think he mocked us while asking for our votes."
He flouted us downright.,He expressed his contempt for us in no uncertain terms.
"No, ’tis his kind of speech: he did not mock us.","No, that’s just the way he speaks. He didn’t mock us."
"Not one amongst us, save yourself, but says He used us scornfully: he should have show’d us","All of us, except you, say he used us scornfully. He should have showed us his marks of merit, the wounds he received for his country."
"Why, so he did, I am sure.",I’m sure he showed you.
"No, no; no man saw ’em.","No, no. No one saw them."
"He said he had wounds, which he could show in private; ‘I would be consul,’ says he: ‘aged custom, But by your voices, will not so permit me; Your voices therefore.’ When we granted that, Here was ‘I thank you for your voices: thank you: your voices, I have no further with you.’ Was not this mockery?","He said he had wounds he could show in private. He waved his hat scornfully and said, “I should be the consul but because of this ancient custom, I can’t be without your votes, so give me your votes.” When we gave them to him, he said, “I thank you for your votes. Thank you. Your most sweet votes, now that you’ve given me your votes, I have no further use for you.” Isn’t that mockery?"
"Why either were you ignorant to see’t, Or, seeing it, of such childish friendliness","You were either too ignorant to see it, or if you did see it, you were too childish and accommodating to deny him your vote."
"Could you not have told him As you were lesson’d, when he had no power, But was a petty servant to the state, He was your enemy, ever spake against I’ the body of the weal; and now, arriving A place of potency and sway o’ the state, If he should still malignantly remain Fast foe to the plebeii, your voices might That as his worthy deeds did claim no less Than what he stood for, so his gracious nature Would think upon you for your voices and Translate his malice towards you into love,","Couldn’t you have told him as you were instructed? When he had no power and was only a petty servant of the state, he was your enemy. He has always spoken against your freedom and the legal privileges you have. Now that he’s arriving in a position of power and influence on the state, if he remains such an evil enemy to the people, you might have cause to curse yourself for giving him your votes. You should have said that while his acts of bravery do entitle him to the consulship, he should also be gracious and think well of you for giving him your approval. He should transform his hatred toward you into love and become your political advocate."
"Thus to have said, As you were fore-advised, had touch’d his spirit And tried his inclination; from him pluck’d Either his gracious promise, which you might, Or else it would have gall’d his surly nature, Which easily endures not article Tying him to aught; so putting him to rage, You should have ta’en the advantage of his choler","If you’d said that, as you were advised ahead of time, it would have touched his spirit and changed his inclination. You might have gotten a gracious promise from him, which you could have held him to when you needed it. Or else it would have provoked his angry nature, which is easily done, and he would have gone into a rage. You could have used his anger as reason not to vote for him."
"Did you perceive He did solicit you in free contempt When he did need your loves, and do you think That his contempt shall not be bruising to you, No heart among you? or had you tongues to cry Against the rectorship of judgment?",Didn’t you notice that he asked for your vote in blatant contempt even when he needed your approval? So don’t you think that his contempt will harm you when he has power to exercise? Didn’t you have any courage? Couldn’t you cry out against the status quo?
Have you Ere now denied the asker? and now again Your sued-for tongues?,Haven’t you ever refused to vote for someone? And now you give your vote to someone who didn’t even ask for it but mocked you instead?
He’s not confirm’d; we may deny him yet.,He’s not confirmed. He can still deny him.
And will deny him: I’ll have five hundred voices of that sound.,And we will deny him. I’ll get five hundred people to vote against him.
I twice five hundred and their friends to piece ’em.,"I’ll get a thousand people and their friends, too."
"Get you hence instantly, and tell those friends, They have chose a consul that will from them take Their liberties; make them of no more voice Than dogs that are as often beat for barking","Go do it immediately, and tell those friends that they’ve chosen someone for the consul who will take away their freedoms and give them no more voice than dogs have that are repeatedly beaten for barking even though their job is to bark."
"Let them assemble, And on a safer judgment all revoke Your ignorant election; enforce his pride, And his old hate unto you; besides, forget not How in his suit he scorn’d you; but your loves, Thinking upon his services, took from you The apprehension of his present portance, Which most gibingly, ungravely, he did fashion","Let them come together and make a wiser judgment to revoke your ignorant election. Emphasize his pride and his longstanding hatred of you. And don’t forget the contempt with which he wore the gown of humility and how in his quest for your votes, he scorned you. Your admiration of his past service kept you from noticing of his present way of being, which was insulting and inappropriate and reflective of the hatred he feels for you."
"Lay A fault on us, your tribunes; that we laboured, No impediment between, but that you must Cast your election on him.","Blame us, your tribunes. Say that we pushed you not to let these obstacles stop you from voting for him, but that you must repeal your election of him."
"More after our commandment than as guided By your own true affections, and that your minds, Preoccupied with what you rather must do Than what you should, made you against the grain","Say that you chose him based more on our instructions than on your own true feelings, and that because you were preoccupied with what you thought was expected of you, you went against your own interest by voting him consul. Lay the fault on us."
"Ay, spare us not. Say we read lectures to you. How youngly he began to serve his country, How long continued, and what stock he springs of, The noble house o’ the Marcians, from whence came Who, after great Hostilius, here was king; Of the same house Publius and Quintus were, That our beat water brought by conduits hither; And [Censorinus,] nobly named so, Was his great ancestor.","Indeed, don’t spare us. Say we told you all about him, about how young he was when he began to serve his country and how long he has done so, about the noble family he comes from—the same family as Ancus Martius, Numa’s daughter’s son, who was king after great Hostilius. He’s from the same family as Publius and Quintus, the ones who built our best water conduits. And his great ancestor, suitably named Censorinus, was chosen twice as censor by the people."
"One thus descended, That hath beside well in his person wrought To be set high in place, we did commend Scaling his present bearing with his past, That he’s your fixed enemy, and revoke Your sudden approbation.","We asked you to remember that he’s a man descended from a famous family, who also has earned his own high praise. But you have found, weighing his present behavior against his past, that he’s definitely your enemy, and you repeal your hasty approval."
"Say, you ne’er had done’t— And presently, when you have drawn your number, Repair to the Capitol. ALL We will so: almost all","Say that you never would have done it—emphasize that—if we hadn’t put you up to it. And then, when you have enough people on your side, go to the capitol. ALL We will. Almost everyone regrets the vote they gave."
"Let them go on; This mutiny were better put in hazard, Than stay, past doubt, for greater: If, as his nature is, he fall in rage The vantage of his anger.","Let them go on their own. Better to risk this mutiny than wait for the undoubtedly bigger one that would come later. If, his nature being what it is, he goes into a rage over their refusal, both watch for and take advantage of his anger."
"To the Capitol, come: We will be there before the stream o’ the people; And this shall seem, as partly ’tis, their own,","Let’s go to the capitol. We’ll be there before the uprising of the people. And it will appear to be their own initiative, which it partially is, although we urged them into action."
Tullus Aufidius then had made new head?,Tullus Aufidius had assembled a new army?
"He had, my lord; and that it was which caused Our swifter composition.","He had, my lord, and that was why we needed to reach an agreement sooner than expected."
"So then the Volsces stand but as at first, Upon’s again.","So then, the Volsces will be able to attack us again when the time is right."
"They are worn, lord consul, so, That we shall hardly in our ages see Their banners wave again.","They’re worn out, lord consul, so we won’t likely see their banners wave again in our lifetime."
Saw you Aufidius?,Did you see Aufidius?
"On safe-guard he came to me; and did curse Against the Volsces, for they had so vilely Yielded the town: he is retired to Antium.","He came to me, under high security, and cursed the Volsces because they had failed so miserably by letting the town be captured. He has retreated to Antium."
Spoke he of me?,Did he talk about me?
"He did, my lord.","He did, my lord."
How? what?,What did he say?
"How often he had met you, sword to sword; That of all things upon the earth he hated Your person most, that he would pawn his fortunes Be call’d your vanquisher.","He spoke of how often you and he had met in battle. He said that of all things on earth, he hated you the most and that he would pawn his fortunes until he was hopelessly broke in order to defeat you."
At Antium lives he?,He’s living in Antium?
At Antium.,In Antium.
"I wish I had a cause to seek him there,","I wish I had a reason to go there and show him how much I hate him, too. Welcome home."
"Behold, these are the tribunes of the people, The tongues o’ the common mouth: I do despise them; For they do prank them in authority, Against all noble sufferance.","Look, here are the tribunes. I hate them because their authority is an insult to the power of the nobility."
Pass no further.,Go no further.
Ha! what is that?,Ha! What did you say?
It will be dangerous to go on: no further.,It will be dangerous for you to go any further.
What makes this change?,What’s changed?
The matter?,What’s the matter?
Hath he not pass’d the noble and the common?,Hasn’t he been approved by the nobility and the common people?
"Cominius, no.","No, Cominius."
Have I had children’s voices?,Have they broken their promise like children?
"Tribunes, give way; he shall to the market-place.","Tribunes, let us through. He’s going to the marketplace."
The people are incensed against him.,The people are furious with him.
Or all will fall in broil.,"Stop, or a riot will break out."
"Are these your herd? Must these have voices, that can yield them now And straight disclaim their tongues? What are You being their mouths, why rule you not their teeth? Have you not set them on?","Is this your herd? Why do these people have the right to vote, if they can vote one way and then immediately change their mind? What’s your job? If you control what they think and say, can’t you control what they do? Have you incited them against us?"
"Be calm, be calm.","Be calm, be calm."
"It is a purposed thing, and grows by plot, Suffer’t, and live with such as cannot rule Nor ever will be ruled.","It’s a deliberate plot to undercut the authority of the nobility. If we succumb to it, we’ll have to live alongside these uncontrollable people who themselves are incapable of governing."
"Call’t not a plot: The people cry you mock’d them, and of late, Scandal’d the suppliants for the people, call’d them Time-pleasers, flatterers, foes to nobleness.","Don’t call it a plot. The people say you mocked them, and recently when corn was given to them for free, you complained and slandered us, the representatives of the people, calling us opportunists, flatterers, and enemies to nobility."
"Why, this was known before.",You were already known as such.
Not to them all.,Not all of them thought so.
Have you inform’d them sithence?,Have you informed them since?
How! I inform them!,How would I inform them?
You are like to do such business.,By the way you do business.
"Not unlike, Each way, to better yours.","Possibly, but whatever I do, I do it better than you would do as consul."
"Let me deserve so ill as you, and make me Your fellow tribune.","Why then should I be consul? If I am as bad as you, make me your fellow tribune."
"You show too much of that For which the people stir: if you will pass Which you are out of, with a gentler spirit, Or never be so noble as a consul, Nor yoke with him for tribune.","You cause too much disturbance among the people. If you want to get where you want to go, you must ask kindly to get there. You’re a long way off from doing that. And without doing so, you’ll never be noble enough to be consul or even be his equal as a tribune."
Let’s be calm.,Let’s stay calm.
"Becomes not Rome, nor has Coriolanus Deserved this so dishonour’d rub, laid falsely I’ the plain way of his merit.",The people have been deceived and now incited. Trickery like this is not how Romans behave. Coriolanus shouldn’t be dishonored by these false accusations because his bravery makes him so clearly deserving.
Tell me of corn!,"Talk to me about corn! This was my speech, and I will speak it again—"
"Not now, not now.","Not now, not now."
"Not in this heat, sir, now.","Not when the people are so agitated, sir, not now."
"Now, as I live, I will. My nobler friends, I crave their pardons: Regard me as I do not flatter, and Therein behold themselves: I say again, In soothing them, we nourish ’gainst our senate The cockle of rebellion, insolence, sedition, and scatter’d, By mingling them with us, the honour’d number, Who lack not virtue, no, nor power, but that Which they have given to beggars.","As sure as I’m alive, I will speak now. My nobler friends, I beg your pardon. As for the two-faced, stinking masses, let them see themselves clearly because I will not flatter them. I say again, by flattering them, we encourage the seeds of rebellion, disobedience, treason against our Senate—seeds that we ourselves have plowed for, sowed, and scattered by mingling them with us, the honorable ones. The only virtue or power that we lack is that which we have given to these beggars."
"Well, no more.","That’s enough, no more."
"No more words, we beseech you.","No more words, we beg you."
"How! no more! As for my country I have shed my blood, Not fearing outward force, so shall my lungs Which we disdain should tatter us, yet sought The very way to catch them.","What? No more? I have shed my blood for my country without fearing opposing forces, so my lungs will speak until the hated measles—that we caught by trying to help the people—cause us to become infected and die."
"You speak o’ the people, As if you were a god to punish, not","You speak of the people as if you were a god to punish them, not a mortal man just like them."
’Twere well We let the people know’t.,It would be a good idea for us to let the people know this.
"What, what? his choler?",Know what? About his anger?
"Choler! By Jove, ’twould be my mind!","Anger! If I were as calm as in midnight sleep, by Jove, this would still be my opinion!"
"It is a mind That shall remain a poison where it is, Not poison any further.",It’s a poisonous opinion that shall remain where it is and not poison any further.
Hear you this Triton of the minnows? mark you His absolute ‘shall’?,"“Shall remain”? Do you hear this, Triton of the minnows? Do you hear his absolute “shall”?"
’Twas from the canon.,It was inappropriate.
"‘Shall’! You grave but reckless senators, have you thus Given Hydra here to choose an officer, That with his peremptory ‘shall,’ being but The horn and noise o’ the monster’s, wants not spirit And make your channel his? If he have power Then vail your ignorance; if none, awake Your dangerous lenity. If you are learn’d, Be not as common fools; if you are not, If they be senators: and they are no less, When, both your voices blended, the great’st taste Most palates theirs. They choose their magistrate, And such a one as he, who puts his ‘shall,’ Than ever frown in Greece. By Jove himself! It makes the consuls base: and my soul aches To know, when two authorities are up, Neither supreme, how soon confusion The one by the other.","“Shall”! Oh, good but most unwise nobleman! You dignified but reckless senators, why have you permitted this many-headed monster to choose a representative whose arrogant “shall” is just the monster’s noisy horn and who has the nerve to say he’ll take advantage of your power and use your resources for his own purposes? If he’s in power, then it’s your mistake that has you bowing to him. If not, then wake up from your dangerous tolerance of him. If you’re good leaders, don’t be common fools. If you’re not, let them have seats with you in the Senate. If they were senators, that would make you into commoners. And if you had equal say, the interests of the common people would outweigh yours. The people chose as their representative someone who addresses his “shall,” his common man’s command of “shall” to the most dignified legislature since the Greeks. By Jove himself! It lowers the position of the consuls and my soul aches to know, when there are two authorities and neither is supreme, how quickly chaos will arise in the space between them and use one to overthrow the other."
"Well, on to the market-place.",Let’s go on to the marketplace.
"Whoever gave that counsel, to give forth The corn o’ the storehouse gratis, as ’twas used","Whoever gave the advice to give out corn from the storehouse for free, as they used to do in Greece—"
"Well, well, no more of that.",That’s enough. No more talk of that.
"Though there the people had more absolute power, I say, they nourish’d disobedience, fed The ruin of the state.","Even though the people had more absolute power in Greece, I think whoever gave that advice invited disobedience and caused the ruin of the state."
One that speaks thus their voice?,Should the people give up someone who speaks for them?
"I’ll give my reasons, More worthier than their voices. They know the corn Was not our recompense, resting well assured Even when the navel of the state was touch’d, They would not thread the gates. This kind of service Did not deserve corn gratis. Being i’ the war Their mutinies and revolts, wherein they show’d Which they have often made against the senate, All cause unborn, could never be the motive Of our so frank donation. Well, what then? How shall this bisson multitude digest What’s like to be their words: ‘we did request it; We are the greater poll, and in true fear They gave us our demands.’ Thus we debase The nature of our seats and make the rabble Break ope the locks o’ the senate and bring in The crows to peck the eagles.","I’ll give my reasons, which are worthier than their wishes. They know they didn’t earn the corn, as they certainly never did any service for it. Even when they were drafted to fight the war when the center of the state was threatened, they wouldn’t leave the city gates. This kind of service doesn’t deserve free corn. When they were in the war, their mutinies and revolts, which were the only times they showed any courage, didn’t speak well for them. Their frequent accusation that the Senate was hoarding corn had no basis, so it could never be the reason for our generous gift. Well, what then? How will this many-headed monster repay the Senate’s kindness? Let their actions express what their words should be: “We asked for it, we are the majority of the population, and out of fear they gave in to our demands.” In doing this we degrade the nature of our position and make the rabble think that our sympathy is fear. In time this will break open the locks of the Senate, and the scavengers will devour us."
"Come, enough.","Okay, that’s enough."
"Enough, with over-measure.",Enough overstatement.
"What may be sworn by, both divine and human, Seal what I end withal! This double worship, Where one part does disdain with cause, the other Insult without all reason, where gentry, title, wisdom, Of general ignorance,—it must omit Real necessities, and give way the while To unstable slightne purpose so barr’d, it follows, You that will be less fearful than discreet, That love the fundamental part of state More than you doubt the change on’t, that prefer A noble life before a long, and wish That’s sure of death without it, at once pluck out The multitudinous tongue; let them not lick The sweet which is their poison: your dishonour Mangles true judgment and bereaves the state Not having the power to do the good it would, For the in which doth control’t.","No, there’s more! I swear there’s both divine and human confirmation of what I have to say. A divided government—in which one part rightfully despises the other and the other part makes insulting accusations without any reason, and in which people of class, title, and wisdom are reduced to deciding things just by voting yes or no—will be unable to focus on important matters and so instead will deal only with trivial concerns. When governing becomes so difficult, it makes sense that nothing will get done well. So I beg you, you who won’t be afraid to take action because you care more about preserving our government than you fear the consequences of doing so, you who prefer a noble life over a long one and are willing to use a dangerous medicine to help someone who would otherwise surely die, you must immediately remove the representatives of the common people. Don’t let the tribunes use their poisonous flattery. When they dishonor you, it’s an impediment to justice. It robs the state of your much-needed integrity and leaves the state without the power to do the good it would because evil forces are controlling it."
Has said enough.,He has said enough.
"Has spoken like a traitor, and shall answer",He has spoken like a traitor and must be punished as a traitor.
"Thou wretch, despite o’erwhelm thee! What should the people do with these bald tribunes? On whom depending, their obedience fails To the greater bench: in a rebellion, Then were they chosen: in a better hour, Let what is meet be said it must be meet, And throw their power i’ the dust.","You wretch. I feel overwhelming contempt for you! Why should the people have these stupid tribunes? By depending on you, they fail to obey the Senate’s higher authority. In a rebellion, actions that are wrong but unavoidable are sanctioned because of the circumstances under which they are chosen. But when times are better, it must be said that what is right must be done. So throw the tribunes’ power in the garbage."
Manifest treason!,That’s blatantly treason!
This a consul? no.,This man is consul? No.
"The aediles, ho!","Aediles A tribune’s assistant Aediles , come here!"
Let him be apprehended.,Seize him.
"Go, call the people:","Go, call the people."
"in whose name myself A foe to the public weal: obey, I charge thee, And follow to thine answer.","(to Coriolanus) In the people’s name I call you a traitorous rebel, an enemy to the people. Obey, I command you, and follow me to your interrogation. [SICINIUS tries to seize CORIOLANUS]"
"Hence, old goat!","Get off me, old goat!"
We’ll surety him.,We stand behind him.
"Aged sir, hands off.","Old man, take your hands off him."
"Hence, rotten thing! or I shall shake thy bones Out of thy garments.","Get off me, you rotten thing! Or I’ll shake your bones out of your clothes."
"Help, ye citizens!","Help, you citizens!"
On both sides more respect.,"Both of you, show more respect."
Here’s he that would take from you all your power.,Here’s the man who would take all your power away from you.
"Seize him, Aediles!","Seize him, aediles!"
Down with him! down with him!,Down with him! Down with him!
"Weapons, weapons, weapons!","Weapons, weapons, weapons!"
"Tribunes! Patricians! Citizens! What, ho! ‘Peace, peace, peace!’ ‘Stay, hold, peace!’","Tribunes! Noblemen! Citizens! What’s happening! Sicinius! Brutus! Coriolanus! Citizens! Peace, peace, peace! Stay, wait, peace!"
"What is about to be? I am out of breath; Confusion’s near; I cannot speak. You, tribunes To the people! Coriolanus, patience!","What’s going to happen? I’m out of breath. Chaos is near. I can’t speak. You tribunes, talk to the people! Coriolanus, be patient! Speak, good Sicinius."
"Hear me, people; peace!","Hear me, people. Be calm!"
"Let’s hear our tribune: peace! Speak, speak, speak.","Let’s hear our tribune. Please speak, speak, speak."
"You are at point to lose your liberties: Martius would have all from you; Martius,","You’re about to lose your freedom. Martius will take everything from you. Martius, who you have just selected for consul."
"Fie, fie, fie! This is the way to kindle, not to quench.","No, no, no! That’s the way to incite them further, not calm them down."
To unbuild the city and to lay all flat.,To destroy the city and tear all the buildings down.
What is the city but the people?,What is the city if not the people?
The people are the city.,"True, the people make the city."
"By the consent of all, we were establish’d The people’s magistrates.","By everyone’s agreement, we were selected to speak for the people."
You so remain.,You still do.
And so are like to do.,"And most likely, you’re about to speak."
"That is the way to lay the city flat; To bring the roof to the foundation, And bury all, which yet distinctly ranges, In heaps and piles of ruin.","That’s the way to destroy the city, to bring the roof to the foundation and bury it all, and yet the heaps and piles of ruin have a distinct hierarchy."
This deserves death.,This deserves death.
"Or let us stand to our authority, Or let us lose it. We do here pronounce, Upon the part o’ the people, in whose power We were elected theirs, Martius is worthy","Either let us exercise our authority, or let us lose it. On behalf of the people who we were elected to represent, we declare that Martius deserves to die immediately."
"Therefore lay hold of him; Bear him to the rock Tarpeian, and from thence Into destruction cast him.","So grab him, take him to the Tarpeian rock, and throw him off the edge."
"Aediles, seize him!","BRUTUS Aediles, seize him!"
"Yield, Martius, yield!","Surrender, Martius, surrender!"
"Hear me one word; Beseech you, tribunes, hear me but a word.","Let me say one thing. Please, tribunes, let me say just one thing."
"Peace, peace!","Peace, peace!"
"[To BRUTUS] Be that you seem, truly your And temperately proceed to what you would Thus violently redress.","(to Brutus) Act as you should if you’re a true servant of your country. Proceed moderately, not with the violent solution you have in mind."
"Sir, those cold ways, That seem like prudent helps, are very poisonous And bear him to the rock.","Sir, those moderate ways that seem prudent are actually poisonous when the problem is serious. Grab him and take him to the rock."
"No, I’ll die here.","No, I’ll die here."
"There’s some among you have beheld me fighting: Come, try upon yourselves what you have seen me.","There’s some among you who have seen me fight. Come, try for yourselves to do what you’ve seen me do in battle."
"Down with that sword! Tribunes, withdraw awhile.","Put that sword down! Tribunes, go away for a while."
Lay hands upon him.,Grab him.
"Help Martius, help, You that be noble; help him, young and old!","Help Martius, help him, you who are noble. Help him, whether you’re young or old!"
"Down with him, down with him!","Down with him, down with him!"
All will be naught else.,"(to Coriolanus) Go home, be gone, go away! All will be lost otherwise."
Get you gone.,(to Coriolanus) Get out of here.
Stand fast; We have as many friends as enemies.,Stay where you are. We have as many allies as enemies.
Sham it be put to that?,Will it come to that?
"The gods forbid! I prithee, noble friend, home to thy house; Leave us to cure this cause.","(to Coriolanus) The gods forbid! I beg you, noble friend, go home. Leave us to handle this situation."
"For ’tis a sore upon us,","It’s dangerous for all of us now, and you can’t fix it yourself. Go now, I beg you."
"Come, sir, along with us.","Please, sir, come with us."
"I would they were barbarians—as they are, Though in Rome litter’d—not Romans—as they are not, Though calved i’ the porch o’ the Capitol—","I wish they were barbarians—which they are, even though they were born in Rome—and not Romans—which they aren’t even though they born on the steps of the capitol—"
Put not your worthy rage into your tongue; One time will owe another.,"Go away. You’re understandably angry, but stop speaking your anger. There will be time for that in the future."
On fair ground I could beat forty of them.,I could easily beat a large number of them.
"Take up a brace o’ the best of them; yea, the two tribunes: But now ’tis odds beyond arithmetic; And manhood is call’d foolery, when it stands Before the tag return? whose rage doth rend Like interrupted waters and o’erbear What they are used to bear.","I myself could fight a pair of the best of them—indeed, the two tribunes! But now the odds are beyond calculation, and courage becomes foolishness when it stands beneath a falling building. (to Coriolanus) Will you go now, before the mob returns? Their rage is like dammed up water that will overflow its banks."
"Pray you, be gone: With those that have but little: this must be patch’d With cloth of any colour.","(to Coriolanus) Please, go now. I’ll try to reason with them, even though they’re unreasonable. We must try every possible solution to fix this problem."
"Nay, come away.",Let’s go.
This man has marr’d his fortune.,He has ruined himself.
"He would not flatter Neptune for his trident, Or Jove for’s power to thunder. His heart’s his mouth: What his breast forges, that his tongue must vent; And, being angry, does forget that ever","His nature is too noble for the world. He wouldn’t flatter Neptune for his trident or Jove for his power to make thunder. He speaks his mind, and whatever he feels, he must express. And when he gets angry, he forgets that he can also be killed."
Here’s goodly work! SECOND PATRICIAN I would they were abed!,That was fast! SECOND NOBLEMAN I wish they’d gotten away!
I would they were in Tiber! What the vengeance!,I wish they were in Tiber! What the hell! Couldn’t he talk them out of it?
Where is this viper That would depopulate the city and Be every man himself?,Where is this traitor that would drive the people from the city and considers himself to be every man?
"You worthy tribunes,—",You worthy tribunes—
"With rigorous hands: he hath resisted law, And therefore law shall scorn him further trial Than the severity of the public power Which he so sets at nought.","He’ll be thrown without mercy from the Tarpeian rock. He has resisted justice, so justice will deny him any trial other than the strength of public opinion, which to him is worthless."
"The noble tribunes are the people’s mouths, And we their hands.","He’ll soon know that the noble tribunes speak for the people, and we, in turn, put their wishes into action."
"He shall, sure on’t.","He will, I’m sure of it."
"Sir, sir,—","Sir, sir—"
Peace!,Peace!
"Do not cry havoc, where you should but hunt With modest warrant.",Don’t call for his murder. Seek a lesser punishment instead.
"Sir, how comes’t that you Have holp to make this rescue?","Sir, didn’t you help him escape?"
"As I do know the consul’s worthiness, So can I name his faults,—","Listen to me. Because I know this consul’s strengths, I can also tell you his weaknesses—"
Consul! what consul?,Consul! What consul?
The consul Coriolanus.,The consul Coriolanus.
He consul!,He’s not consul!
"No, no, no, no, no.","No, no, no, no, no."
"If, by the tribunes’ leave, and yours, good people, I may be heard, I would crave a word or two; The which shall turn you to no further harm","Good people, if the you and the tribunes will permit me to be heard, I want to say a word or two that will cost you nothing other than the time it takes to listen."
"Speak briefly then; For we are peremptory to dispatch This viperous traitor: to eject him hence Were but one danger, and to keep him here He dies to-night.","Speak quickly then, for we’ve agreed to do away with this monstrous traitor. To banish him would still leave us in danger, and to keep him here would mean our certain death, so he must die tonight."
"Now the good gods forbid That our renowned Rome, whose gratitude Towards her deserved children is enroll’d Should now eat up her own!","The good gods forbid that our renowned Rome, whose gratitude toward her deserving children is Jove’s law, should behave like an unnatural mother and eat her own child!"
He’s a disease that must be cut away.,He’s a disease that must be cut out.
"O, he’s a limb that has but a disease; Mortal, to cut it off; to cure it, easy. Killing our enemies, the blood he hath lost— Which, I dare vouch, is more than that he hath, By many an ounce—he dropp’d it for his country; And what is left, to lose it by his country, A brand to the end o’ the world.","No, he’s just a limb that has a disease. It would be fatal to cut off the limb but easy to cure the disease. What has he done to Rome that’s worth killing him for? He’s killed our enemies and lost more ounces of his own blood than his body still has. He shed it for his country. For his country to take from him the blood he has left would bring eternal shame to all of us who permit it."
This is clean kam.,That’s totally wrong.
"Merely awry: when he did love his country, It honour’d him.","That’s missing the point. When he served his country, it rewarded him."
"Being once gangrened, is not then respected For what before it was.","When a foot becomes infected with gangrene, is it no longer respected for the service it had done previously?"
"We’ll hear no more. Pursue him to his house, and pluck him thence: Spread further.","We’ll hear no more. Go take him from his house, before his contagious infection spreads any further."
"One word more, one word. This tiger-footed rage, when it shall find The harm of unscann’d swiftness, will too late Lest parties, as he is beloved, break out, And sack great Rome with Romans.","One word more, one word. When this fast-moving rage realizes the consequences of acting quickly without thinking, it will be too late to slow it down. Let the legal system solve this dispute, otherwise factions will form, as there are those who support him, and Rome will be destroyed by Romans."
"If it were so,—",If that were true—
What do ye talk? Our aediles smote? ourselves resisted? Come.,What are you talking about? Haven’t we experienced his obedience? Haven’t our aediles been struck by him? Haven’t our own efforts been resisted? Come.
"Consider this: he has been bred i’ the wars Since he could draw a sword, and is ill school’d In bolted language; meal and bran together I’ll go to him, and undertake to bring him Where he shall answer, by a lawful form, In peace, to his utmost peril.",Consider that he’s been brought up in wars since he was old enough to draw a sword. He doesn’t know how to use refined language. He can’t tell the difference between meal and bran. Let me go to him and try to convince him to answer your questions peacefully in court. Legal judgment may still cost him his life.
"Let them puff all about mine ears, present me Death on the wheel or at wild horses’ heels, Or pile ten hills on the Tarpeian rock, That the precipitation might down stretch Be thus to them.","Let them shout their fury. They can put me to death on the wheel, let wild horses drag me, or pile ten hills on the Tarpeian rock, making the fall so far that you can’t see the bottom. It won’t change who I am compared to them."
You do the nobler.,You are nobler than they are.
"I muse my mother Does not approve me further, who was wont To buy and sell with groats, to show bare heads In congregations, to yawn, be still and wonder, When one but of my ordinance stood up To speak of peace or war.","I wonder if my mother still sides with me. She used to call them slaves in rough wool clothes, traders of cheap items who were always taking their hats off to those of higher rank and whose jaws dropped in silent amazement when someone like me made speeches about peace or war."
Why did you wish me milder? would you have me False to my nature? Rather say I play The man I am.,I’m talking about you. Why did you want me to be more subdued? Would you have me be untrue to my nature? Would you rather I pretend to be someone else?
"O, sir, sir, sir, Before you had worn it out.","Oh, sir, sir, sir, I wanted your power to be made official before you used it up."
Let go.,Stop it.
"You might have been enough the man you are, With striving less to be so; lesser had been You had not show’d them how ye were disposed Ere they lack’d power to cross you.",You would’ve been enough of a man without fighting so hard to prove yourself. The people wouldn’t have condemned you if you hadn’t shown them your true disposition before they lost the power to stop you.
Let them hang.,Let them hang.
"Ay, and burn too.","Yes, and burn, too."
too rough; You must return and mend it.,"Come, come, you’ve been a bit too rough. You must go back and fix things with the people."
"There’s no remedy; Unless, by not so doing, our good city","There’s no remedy. Unless you go, our good city will break in two and be ruined."
"Pray, be counsell’d: I have a heart as little apt as yours, But yet a brain that leads my use of anger To better vantage.","Please, listen to this advice. I’m as stubborn as you are, but I’m smart enough to use my anger to my advantage."
"Before he should thus stoop to the herd, but that The violent fit o’ the time craves it as physic For the whole state, I would put mine armour on, Which I can scarcely bear.","Well said, noble woman. Before he returns to the masses, given the current violent climate in the state, which demands a solution to this problem, I’d like to put my armor on, even though I am barely strong enough to wear it."
What must I do?,What should I do?
Return to the tribunes.,Return to the tribunes.
"Well, what then? what then?",And then what?
Repent what you have spoke.,Take back what you said.
For them! I cannot do it to the gods;,"For them! I can’t take back what I’ve said to the gods, but I must I take back what I’ve said to the people?"
"You are too absolute; Though therein you can never be too noble, But when extremities speak. I have heard you say, Honour and policy, like unsever’d friends, In peace what each of them by the other lose, That they combine not there.","You’re too rigid. You can never be too noble, except in extreme circumstances. I’ve heard you say that in war, honor and strategy go together. If that’s the case, tell me, why wouldn’t they also go together in times of peace?"
"Tush, tush!","Hush, hush!"
A good demand.,That’s a good question.
"The same you are not, which, for your best ends, You adopt your policy, how is it less or worse, That it shall hold companionship in peace With honour, as in war, since that to both","If it’s honorable in war to pretend to be other than how you are, if it serves your end goal, why is it less honorable to do so in times of peace?"
Why force you this?,Why do you ask?
"Because that now it lies you on to speak To the people; not by your own instruction, Nor by the matter which your heart prompts you, Your tongue, though but bastards and syllables Of no allowance to your bosom’s truth. Now, this no more dishonours you at all Than to take in a town with gentle words, The hazard of much blood. I would dissemble with my nature where My fortunes and my friends at stake required I should do so in honour: I am in this, And you will rather show our general louts How you can frown than spend a fawn upon ’em, For the inheritance of their loves and safeguard Of what that want might ruin.","Because you have to speak to the people now—and not to give them instructions or to talk from your heart. What you say can’t reflect the truth of what you really feel. However, this doesn’t dishonor you any more than it would to capture a town with flattering words, a town that would otherwise take your fortune and spill your blood. I would feel it honorable to hide my real nature if my fortune and my friends were at risk. I speak for your wife, your son, these senators, and the nobles about this: you’d prefer to show the miserable commoners how you frown than flatter them in any way, even for the sake of their approval and to protect what might be ruined without it."
"Come, go with us; speak fair: you may salve so, Not what is dangerous present, but the loss Of what is past.",Noble lady! Come with us. Your honest words may heal not only present dangers but also past losses.
"I prithee now, my son, And thus far having stretch’d it—here be with them— Thy knee bussing the stones—for in such business Action is eloquence, and the eyes of the ignorant More learned than the ears—waving thy head, Now humble as the ripest mulberry That will not hold the handling: or say to them, Thou art their soldier, and being bred in broils Hast not the soft way which, thou dost confess, In asking their good loves, but thou wilt frame Thyself, forsooth, hereafter theirs, so far As thou hast power and person.","I beg you now, my son, go to them, with your hat in your hand. And once you’ve extended your hat to them—do what they ask—get on your knees and kiss the ground, bow your head and humble your proud heart like the ripest mulberry that falls from the branch the moment it’s touched—for in this situation actions speak louder than words. Or tell them that you are their soldier and admit that because you were raised on the battlefield, you never learned a gentle way with words, but you realize you should have spoken more kindly when asking for their votes. Tell them that you’ll work for their benefit from here on out, to the extent of your political power and physical ability."
"This but done, For they have pardons, being ask’d, as free As words to little purpose.","(To Coriolanus) Do as she says, and their hearts will belong to you. If you ask, they’ll pardon you as easily as they speak their nonsense."
"Prithee now, Go, and be ruled: although I know thou hadst rather Than flatter him in a bower. Here is Cominius.","Please, go now. Submit to them, although I know you’d rather pursue your enemy through the fires of hell than flatter him in a boudoir. Here’s Cominius."
"I have been i’ the market-place; and, sir, ’tis fit You make strong party, or defend yourself By calmness or by absence: all’s in anger.","Sir, I’ve been in the marketplace. You’ll need to argue your case strongly or defend yourself with calmness—or don’t come at all. Everyone is angry."
Only fair speech.,Just speak kindly.
"I think ’twill serve, if he Can thereto frame his spirit.","I think that’ll work, if he can control his temper."
"He must, and will Prithee now, say you will, and go about it.","He must, and I beg you, say you will and then go do it."
"Must I with base tongue give my noble heart A lie that it must bear? Well, I will do’t: Yet, were there but this single plot to lose, This mould of Martius, they to dust should grind it You have put me now to such a part which never I shall discharge to the life.","Do I have to show them my head without a helmet? Do I have to betray my heart and speak words that are lies? Well, I’ll do it. But if I lose, they’ll grind me into dust and throw it against the wind. To the marketplace! You’re asking me to play a part that I will never play convincingly."
"Come, come, we’ll prompt you.","Come, come, we’ll tell you what to say."
"I prithee now, sweet son, as thou hast said To have my praise for this, perform a part Thou hast not done before.","I beg you now, sweet son. You’ve said that my encouragement is what made you into a soldier, so I encourage you now to play this new role."
"Well, I must do’t: Away, my disposition, and possess me Which quired with my drum, into a pipe Small as an eunuch, or the virgin voice That babies lulls asleep! the smiles of knaves Tent in my cheeks, and schoolboys’ tears take up Make motion through my lips, and my arm’d knees, Who bow’d but in my stirrup, bend like his That hath received an alms! I will not do’t, Lest I surcease to honour mine own truth A most inherent baseness.","Well, I must do it. I’ll hide my true nature and become like a whore! My voice, which ordinarily calls for war, will harmonize with my drum and become the voice of a eunuch or a virgin that sings babies to sleep! I’ll smile like a servant, cry like a schoolboy, and speak like a beggar! My armored knees, which ordinarily only bend in my saddle, will bend like a man receiving alms! I won’t do it because it will dishonor my true nature, and what I do with my body will degrade my mind."
"At thy choice, then: To beg of thee, it is my more dishonour Than thou of them. Come all to ruin; let Thy dangerous stoutness, for I mock at death With as big heart as thou. Do as thou list Thy valiantness was mine, thou suck’dst it from me, But owe thy pride thyself.","This is your choice then. It is more dishonorable for me to have to beg you than for you to have to beg them. Everything will be ruined. I’d rather endure the consequences of challenging your pride rather than be afraid of it, for I fear death as little as you do. Do as you please. Your courage comes from me—you sucked it from me as a nursing baby—but your pride is all your own."
"Mother, I am going to the market-place; Chide me no more. I’ll mountebank their loves, Cog their hearts from them, and come home beloved Of all the trades in Rome. Look, I am going: Or never trust to what my tongue can do I’ the way of flattery further.","That’s enough, mother. I’m going to the marketplace. Don’t scold me any further. I’ll deceive them into liking me, steal their hearts, and come home beloved by all the tradesmen in Rome. Look, I’m going. Give my regards to my wife. I’ll come back as consul. Never again doubt how well my tongue can flatter."
Do your will.,Do what you need to do.
"Away! the tribunes do attend you: arm yourself With accusations, as I hear, more strong Than are upon you yet.",Go! The tribunes are waiting for you. Be prepared to answer questions mildly. I’ve heard that they have even stronger accusations than the ones they’ve made so far.
"The word is ‘mildly.’ Pray you, let us go: Let them accuse me by invention, I","The key word is “mild.” Please, let’s go. Let them invent accusations against me, and I’ll answer honorably."
"Ay, but mildly.","Yes, but mildly."
"Well, mildly be it then. Mildly!","Well, mildly it will be then. Mildly!"
"In this point charge him home, that he affects Tyrannical power: if he evade us there, Enforce him with his envy to the people, And that the spoil got on the Antiates","Drive this point home: his aim is to be a tyrant. If he dodges this accusation, confront him with his ill-will toward the people, and that the spoils won from the Antiates were never distributed."
"What, will he come?",Is he coming?
He’s coming.,He’s coming.
How accompanied?,Who’s he with?
"With old Menenius, and those senators",With old Menenius and those senators that have always favored him.
Have you a catalogue Of all the voices that we have procured Set down by the poll?,Do you have a list of all the individual votes taken in our poll?
I have; ’tis ready.,I do. It’s ready.
Have you collected them by tribes?,Have you counted them by district?
I have.,I have.
"Assemble presently the people hither; And when they bear me say ‘It shall be so I’ the right and strength o’ the commons,’ be it either If I say fine, cry ‘Fine;’ if death, cry ‘Death.’ Insisting on the old prerogative And power i’ the truth o’ the cause.","Bring the people here now, and when I say, “The decision of the people is,” whether it’s death, fine, or banishment, if I say, “fine,” have them cry, “Fine,” if “death,” cry, “Death.” They must insist on their legal right to decide this and the power that comes from the truth of their cause."
I shall inform them.,I’ll tell them.
"Let them not cease, but with a din confused Enforce the present execution Of what we chance to sentence.","And when they begin to cry out, don’t let them stop. The chaotic noise will force their decision to be carried out on the spot."
Very well.,Very well.
When we shall hap to give ’t them.,Prepare them for this. They have to be able to get the signal when we give it to them.
Go about it.,Do it.
"Put him to choler straight: he hath been used Ever to conquer, and to have his worth Be rein’d again to temperance; then he speaks What’s in his heart; and that is there which looks With us to break his neck.","Get him angry right away. He’s accustomed to always winning and being as controversial as he pleases. Once he’s provoked, he won’t be able to rein in his temper. Then he’ll say how he really feels, and most likely we can use that as reason to break his neck."
"Well, here he comes.","Well, here he comes."
"Calmly, I do beseech you.","Stay calm, I beg you."
"Ay, as an ostler, that for the poorest piece Will bear the knave by the volume. The honour’d gods Keep Rome in safety, and the chairs of justice Supplied with worthy men! plant love among ’s! And not our streets with war!","Yes, like a stable boy that for the smallest amount of money will tolerate being called a slave over and over again. May the honored gods protect Rome and supply the chairs of justice with worthy men! Let there be love among us! Fill our large temples with demonstrations of peace and not our streets with war!"
"Amen, amen.","Amen, amen."
A noble wish.,A noble wish.
"Draw near, ye people.","Come close, you people."
"List to your tribunes. Audience: peace, I say!",Listen to your tribunes. Be quiet!
"First, hear me speak.",Let me speak first.
"Well, say. Peace, ho!","Well then, talk! Stay calm."
Shall I be charged no further than this present? Must all determine here?,Are there any further charges against me besides these? Will everything be settled here?
"If you submit you to the people’s voices, Allow their officers and are content To suffer lawful censure for such faults As shall be proved upon you?","Will you agree to listen to the people, respect their representatives, and undergo lawful punishment for the offenses we’ll prove you committed?"
I am content.,"Yes, I agree."
"Lo, citizens, he says he is content: The warlike service he has done, consider; think Upon the wounds his body bears, which show Like graves i’ the holy churchyard.","All right citizens, he says he agrees. Think of the wars he has served in. Think about the wounds on his body—each of them is like an enemy’s gravestone."
Scars to move laughter only.,They’re no more serious than scratches from a prickly plant. They’re scars that you’d only laugh at.
"Consider further, That when he speaks not like a citizen, You find him like a soldier: do not take But, as I say, such as become a soldier, Rather than envy you.","Consider also that because he doesn’t speak like you, you think he’s attacking you. Don’t mistake his coarse way of speaking for hateful words. He’s just talking the way soldiers talk. He’s not speaking ill of you."
"Well, well, no more.","Okay, that’s enough."
What is the matter I am so dishonour’d that the very hour You take it off again?,How did it happen that I was approved for consul with a unanimous vote and in the next moment I’m disgraced by a change of opinion?
Answer to us.,Answer our questions.
"Say, then: ’tis true, I ought so.",Well it’s true then. I thought so.
From Rome all season’d office and to wind Yourself into a power tyrannical; For which you are a traitor to the people.,We accuse you of trying to do away with the established legal system in Rome and to put yourself in a position of tyrannical power. For this you are a traitor to the people.
How! traitor!,How am I a traitor?
"Nay, temperately; your promise.","No, stay calm. You promised."
"The fires i’ the lowest hell fold-in the people! Call me their traitor! Thou injurious tribune! Within thine eyes sat twenty thousand deaths, In thy hand clutch’d as many millions, in ‘Thou liest’ unto thee with a voice as free As I do pray the gods.","May the people fall into the fires of the lowest hell! You’re calling me a traitor? You slanderous tribune! If your eyes had killed twenty thousand people, your hands had killed a million, and your lying tongue had killed those numbers together, I would still say to you, ”You lie” with a voice as honest as the one I pray to the gods with."
"Mark you this, people?","Do you hear this, people?"
"To the rock, to the rock with him!",Throw him from the rock!
"We need not put new matter to his charge: What you have seen him do and heard him speak, Beating your officers, cursing yourselves, Opposing laws with strokes and here defying So criminal and in such capital kind, Deserves the extremest death.","Peace! We don’t need to aggravate him further. What you’ve seen him do and heard him say—beating your officers, speaking ill of you, opposing our laws with force, and now defying those who have the great power to put him on trial—even this, which is criminal and punishable by death, deserves the most severe penalty."
"But since he hath Served well for Rome,—",But since he has served Rome so well—
What do you prate of service?,Why do you talk about service?
"I talk of that, that know it.",I talk about what I know.
You?,What do you know about service?
Is this the promise that you made your mother?,Is this the promise that you made your mother?
"Know, I pray you,—","Listen, I beg you—"
"Let them pronounce the steep Tarpeian death, Vagabond exile, raying, pent to linger But with a grain a day, I would not buy Their mercy at the price of one fair word; To have’t with saying ‘Good morrow.’","I’ll listen no more. Let them throw me from the steep Tarpeian rock, make me a wandering exile, skin me alive, or condemn me to live on just a grain a day. I wouldn’t buy their mercy at the cost of the truth, nor would I hold back my beliefs for the freedom they can give me, if I had to say to them, “Good day.”"
"For that he has, As much as in him lies, from time to time Envied against the people, seeking means Given hostile strokes, and that not in the presence Of dreaded justice, but on the ministers That do distribute it; in the name o’ the people And in the power of us the tribunes, we, In peril of precipitation From off the rock Tarpeian never more To enter our Rome gates: i’ the people’s name, I say it shall be so.","As much as he could, he has continually conspired against the people, looking for ways to take away their power, and now he’s finally taken violent measures, and not only in front of justice itself but also those who attempt to carry it out. In the name of the people and by our power as tribunes, from this moment forward we banish him from our city. If he ever enters the gates of Rome again, he will be thrown off the Tarpeian rock. I declare this on behalf of the people."
"He’s banish’d, and it shall be so.","It shall be so, it shall be so. Take him away. He’s banished, and it shall be so."
"Hear me, my masters, and my common friends,—","Listen to me, good people, my friends—"
He’s sentenced; no more hearing.,He’s been sentenced. There’s nothing more to say.
"Let me speak: Her enemies’ marks upon me. I do love My country’s good with a respect more tender, More holy and profound, than mine own life, My dear wife’s estimate, her womb’s increase, Speak that,—","Let me speak. I have been consul, and I can show you the wounds I’ve received fighting for Rome. My feelings about the welfare of my country are more tender, more holy, and more profound than how I feel about my own life, my dear wife’s reputation, her ability to bear my precious children. So I would like to say—"
We know your drift: speak what?,We know your loyalty. What do you want to say?
"There’s no more to be said, but he is banish’d, As enemy to the people and his country:",There’s no more to be said: he is banished as enemy to the people and his country. It shall be so.
"It shall be so, it shall be so.","It shall be so, it shall be so."
"You common cry of curs! whose breath I hate As reek o’ the rotten fens, whose loves I prize As the dead carcasses of unburied men And here remain with your uncertainty! Let every feeble rumour shake your hearts! Your enemies, with nodding of their plumes, Fan you into despair! Have the power still Your ignorance, which finds not till it feels, Making not reservation of yourselves, Still your own foes, deliver you as most Abated captives to some nation For you, the city, thus I turn my back: There is a world elsewhere.","You pack of common dogs! Your breath reeks like the rotting swamps. I value your opinion of me as much as the dead carcasses of unburied men that stink up my air. I banish you! Stay here with your indecisiveness and let every feeble rumor change your minds. When you see your enemies plumed helmets approaching, may you fall into despair! May you retain the power to banish the ones who would protect you, until at last your ignorance—which makes you unable to foresee anything before it happens and leaves you alone in the city as your own worst enemy—leads you to be captured by some nation that defeated you without a fight! With hatred, I turn my back on you and the city. I will seek a new life elsewhere."
"The people’s enemy is gone, is gone!",The people’s enemy is gone. He is gone!
Our enemy is banish’d! he is gone! Hoo! hoo!,"Our enemy is banished! He is gone! Hoo, hoo!"
"As he hath followed you, with all despite; Give him deserved vexation. Let a guard Attend us through the city.","Go, see him go out the gates, and look at him with contempt, as he looked at you. Torment him—he deserves it. Let a parade follow us through the city."
"Come, come; let’s see him out at gates; come.","Come, come. Let’s see him go out the gates. Come. May the gods protect our noble tribunes! Come."
"Come, leave your tears: a brief farewell: the beast Where is your ancient courage? you were used To say extremity was the trier of spirits; That common chances common men could bear; Show’d mastership in floating; fortune’s blows, When most struck home, being gentle wounded, craves A noble cunning: you were used to load me With precepts that would make invincible","Stop crying now. A brief farewell! The people, like a many-headed beast, push me out. Stop it, mother. What happened to your courage? You used to say that adversity was a test of character. That even common people can handle the chance circumstances of their lives. That when the sea is calm all boats float equally well. That when fate strikes you hardest, you must have the skill of a nobleman to endure your wounds with dignity. You used to repeat these sayings to me, sayings that would make anyone who heard them enough invincible."
O heavens! O heavens!,"Oh, heavens! Oh, heavens!"
"Nay! prithee, woman,—","Stop it! Please, woman—"
"Now the red pestilence strike all trades in Rome, And occupations perish!",Now the typhoid fever strikes all the tradesmen in Rome and the economy is crumbling!
"I shall be loved when I am lack’d. Nay, mother. Resume that spirit, when you were wont to say, If you had been the wife of Hercules, Six of his labours you’ld have done, and saved Droop not; adieu. Farewell, my wife, my mother: I’ll do well yet. Thou old and true Menenius, Thy tears are salter than a younger man’s, And venomous to thine eyes. My sometime general, Heart-hardening spectacles; tell these sad women ’Tis fond to wail inevitable strokes, As ’tis to laugh at ’em. My mother, you wot well My hazards still have been your solace: and Like to a lonely dragon, that his fen Makes fear’d and talk’d of more than seen—your son Will or exceed the common or be caught With cautelous baits and practise.","Enough, enough, enough! You’ll love me when I’m gone. Stop it, mother. Bring back your old spirit, when you used to say that if you had been the wife of Hercules, you would have done six of his twelve required tasks and saved him that much effort. Cominius, don’t despair. Goodbye. Farewell, my wife, my mother—I’ll be fine. My old and true friend Menenius, you cry more than a young man, and the salt is bad for your eyes. My former general, I have seen you be brave, and you have seen many heart-hardening spectacles. Tell these sad women that it’s as foolish to cry over inevitabilities as it is to laugh at them. Mother, you’ve always taken comfort in the risks that I take. Know this for a fact: even though I go alone, like a lonely dragon whose swamp is more feared and talked about than it is seen, I will either exceed common expectations or be caught by crafty traps and trickery."
"Whither wilt thou go? Take good Cominius With thee awhile: determine on some course, More than a wild exposture to each chance That starts i’ the way before thee.","My firstborn son, where will you go? Take good Cominius with you for a while. Figure out a plan other than just dealing with things as they come up."
O the gods!,"Oh, the gods!"
"I’ll follow thee a month, devise with thee Where thou shalt rest, that thou mayst hear of us And we of thee: so if the time thrust forth A cause for thy repeal, we shall not send And lose advantage, which doth ever cool I’ the absence of the needer.","I’ll go with you for a month and help you find a place to stay and a way to communicate with us. That way, if they overturn your sentence, we won’t have to look all over the whole world to find you and lose momentum on your return."
"Fare ye well: Thou hast years upon thee; and thou art too full That’s yet unbruised: bring me but out at gate. Come, my sweet wife, my dearest mother, and My friends of noble touch, when I am forth, Bid me farewell, and smile. I pray you, come. Hear from me still, and never of me aught But what is like me formerly.","No, I must go alone. You’re too old, and you’ve been in too many wars to go roaming around with someone like me, who’s still fresh. Just take me to the gate. Come, my sweet wife, my dearest mother, and my noble friends. When I go, wish me safe travels and smile. I promise that so long as I’m still alive you’ll hear from me, and the news will be the same as it’s always been about me."
"That’s worthily As any ear can hear. Come, let’s not weep. From these old arms and legs, by the good gods, I’ld with thee every foot.","That’s the best news an ear can hear. Let’s not cry now. If my arms and legs were just seven years younger, by the good gods, I’d go with you all the way."
Give me thy hand: Come.,Give me your hand. Come.
"Bid them all home; he’s gone, and we’ll no further. The nobility are vex’d, whom we see have sided In his behalf.","Tell them all to go home. He’s gone, and we won’t go any further. The nobles who sided with him are angry."
"Now we have shown our power, Than when it was a-doing.","Now that we’ve exerted our power, let’s at least pretend to be humble, like before."
"Bid them home: Say their great enemy is gone, and they Stand in their ancient strength.",Tell them to go home. Explain that their great enemy is gone and that their freedoms have been restored.
Dismiss them home.,Send them home.
Here comes his mother.,Here comes his mother.
Let’s not meet her.,Let’s not talk to her.
Why?,Why?
They say she’s mad.,They say she’s crazy.
They have ta’en note of us: keep on your way.,They’ve seen us. Keep walking.
"O, ye’re well met: the hoarded plague o’ the gods Requite your love!","Some coincidence, running into you. May the gods repay you for this with the plague!"
"Peace, peace; be not so loud.",Calm down. Don’t be so loud.
"If that I could for weeping, you should hear,—","If I could cry quietly I would. You should hear me cry— No, you will hear me."
Will you be gone?,Where are you going?
[To SICINIUS] You shall stay too: I would I had the power To say so to my husband.,"(to Sicinius) You stay, too. I wish I had the power to say that to my husband."
Are you mankind?,Are you a woman?
Was not a man my father? Hadst thou foxship To banish him that struck more blows for Rome Than thou hast spoken words?,"You fool, are you trying to insult me? Listen, fool. Wasn’t my father a man? Are you so ungrateful that you’d banish the man who swung his sword for Rome more times than you’ve even opened your mouth to speak?"
O blessed heavens!,"Oh, blessed heavens!"
"And for Rome’s good. I’ll tell thee what; yet go: Nay, but thou shalt stay too: I would my son Were in Arabia, and thy tribe before him, His good sword in his hand.","He fought nobly for Rome more times than you’ve ever spoken wise words. I’ll tell you what: go! No, stay actually. I wish my son were in the lawless deserts of Arabia, with his sword in hand, and your people stood before him."
What then?,What would happen then?
What then! He’ld make an end of thy posterity.,"What would happen? He’d kill you, and your family line would end."
"Bastards and all. Good man, the wounds that he does bear for Rome!","Your bastard children’s, too. He’s a good man, and he was wounded fighting for Rome!"
"Come, come, peace.","Now, now, stay calm."
"I would he had continued to his country As he began, and not unknit himself The noble knot he made.","I wish he had continued to honor his country the way he always did, rather than renounce his loyalty."
I would he had.,I wish he had.
"Cats, that can judge as fitly of his worth As I can of those mysteries which heaven Will not have earth to know.",“I wish he had”! It was you who incensed the commoners. Those people are like cats and no more able to judge his character than I am able to know the unknowable mysteries of heaven.
"Pray, let us go.","Please, let’s go."
"You have done a brave deed. Ere you go, hear this:— As far as doth the Capitol exceed The meanest house in Rome, so far my son— This lady’s husband here, this, do you see—","Yes. Please, sir, do go away now. You’ve done enough. But before you go, hear this: as much as the capitol building stands taller than the lowest house in Rome, that’s how much my son, her husband, the man you banished, exceeds all of you."
"Well, well, we’ll leave you.",That’s enough. We’re leaving now.
Why stay we to be baited With one that wants her wits?,Why would we stay to be harassed by someone who is so out of her mind?
Take my prayers with you.,Take my prayers with you.
"But to confirm my curses! Could I meet ’em But once a-day, it would unclog my heart Of what lies heavy to’t.","I wish the gods had nothing else to do but carry out my curses! If I could just meet with them once a day, it would unclog the heavy weight from my heart."
You have told them home;,"You’ve driven them away, and rightly so, I believe. Will you eat with me?"
"Anger’s my meat; I sup upon myself, And so shall starve with feeding. Come, let’s go: Leave this faint puling and lament as I do, In anger, Juno-like. Come, come, come.","I’ll eat alone. Anger is my meat, but indulging my anger will also be the death of me. Come, let’s go. Do as I do: stop whining and being sad. Despite being angry, let’s behave like Juno. Come, come, come."
"Fie, fie, fie!","No, no, no!"
"I know you well, sir, and you know me: your name, I think, is Adrian.","I know who you are, sir, and you know me. I think your name is Adrian."
"It is so, sir: truly, I have forgot you.","That is my name, sir. I’m sorry, but I’ve forgotten yours."
"I am a Roman; and my services are,","I’m a Roman, but like you, I work against the Romans. Do you remember me yet?"
Nicanor? no.,Nicanor? No.
"The same, sir.","That’s it, sir."
You had more beard when I last saw you; but your favour is well approved by your tongue. What’s the to find you out there: you have well saved me a day’s journey.,"You had a fuller beard the last time I saw you, but your speech gives you away. What’s happening in Rome? I have instructions from the Volscian state to look for you there. You’ve saved me a day’s journey."
"There hath been in Rome strange insurrections; the people against the senators, patricians, and nobles.","There’s been an unusual uprising in Rome: the people against the senators, patricians, and nobles."
"so: they are in a most warlike preparation, and hope to come upon them in the heat of their division.",Has been? You mean it’s over? Our state doesn’t think so. They’re preparing to attack and hope to surprise them in the middle of the chaos.
"The main blaze of it is past, but a small thing would make it flame again: for the nobles receive Coriolanus, that they are in a ripe aptness to take all power from the people and to pluck from them their tribunes for ever. This lies glowing, I can tell you, and is almost mature for the violent","Most of it’s over, but one small thing would make it erupt again: if the nobles take the news of Coriolanus’s banishment so personally that they themselves decide to take all power from the people and do away with their tribunes forever. This could easily happen, and it would definitely lead to violence."
Coriolanus banished!,Coriolanus has been banished!
"Banished, sir.","Banished, sir."
"You will be welcome with this intelligence, Nicanor.","You’ll be welcome with this news, Nicanor."
"The day serves well for them now. I have heard it when she’s fallen out with her husband. Your noble Tullus Aufidius will appear well in these wars, his great opposer, Coriolanus, being now in no request of his country.","Things are looking good for the Volsces now. As they say, the best time to seduce another man’s wife is when she’s in a fight with her husband. Your noble Tullus Aufidius will do well in this attack, since his main enemy, Coriolanus, is no longer fighting for his own country."
"accidentally to encounter you: you have ended my business, and I will merrily accompany you home.","His victory is inevitable. I’m so glad to run into you. You’ve told me what I needed to know, and I’ll happily accompany you home."
"I shall, between this and supper, tell you most strange things from Rome; all tending to the good of","Between now and dinner, I’ll tell you all the strange things that are happening in Rome, all of which is good news to her enemies. You said you had an army ready?"
"A most royal one; the centurions and their charges, distinctly billeted, already in the entertainment, and to be on foot at an hour’s warning.","A most royal army. Each officer commands a hundred men, and they are all accounted for and deployable on an hour’s notice."
"I am joyful to hear of their readiness, and am the So, sir, heartily well met, and most glad of your company.","I’m overjoyed to hear that they’re ready. I think my report will be what sends them into battle. So glad we met, sir."
"You take my part from me, sir; I have the most cause to be glad of yours.","Me, too, sir. I have even more reason to be glad to have met you."
"Well, let us go together.","Well, let’s go together."
"A goodly city is this Antium. City, ’Tis I that made thy widows: many an heir Of these fair edifices ’fore my wars Have I heard groan and drop: then know me not, In puny battle slay me.","Antium is a good city. I made its women into widows. Its sons have died at my hands in battle. May I go unrecognized, so that the women won’t spit at me and the men won’t throw stones."
"Save you, sir.","May the gods protect you, sir."
And you.,And you.
"Direct me, if it be your will,",Could you please tell me where to find the great Aufidius? Is he in Antium?
"He is, and feasts the nobles of the state At his house this night.",He is. The nobles of the state are having a feast at his house tonight.
"Which is his house, beseech you?","Where is his house, do you mind telling me?"
"This, here before you.","This one, right here."
"Thank you, sir: farewell.","Thank you, sir. Farewell."
"O world, thy slippery turns! Friends now fast sworn, Whose double bosoms seem to wear one heart, Whose house, whose bed, whose meal, and exercise, Are still together, who twin, as ’twere, in love On a dissension of a doit, break out To bitterest enmity: so, fellest foes, Whose passions and whose plots have broke their sleep, To take the one the other, by some chance, And interjoin their issues. So with me: My birth-place hate I, and my love’s upon This enemy town. I’ll enter: if he slay me, He does fair justice; if he give me way,","The world has many twists and turns! Friends who at this moment are loyal to each other, who seem to share one heart, live in the same house, sleep in the same bed, eat the same food, and work together—who love each other like inseparable twins—will, within an hour, become bitter enemies because of a minor disagreement. And mortal enemies, who spend sleepless nights furiously plotting to capture each other’s keep, will by some random chance become dear friends and join their interests together. This is how it is with me: I hate the place I come from and I love my enemy’s town. It would be fair for him to kill me, but if he lets me live, I’ll fight for his country."
"Wine, wine, wine! What service is here! I think our fellows are asleep.","Wine, wine, wine! What kind of service is this? I think the other servants are asleep."
Where’s Cotus? my master calls for him. Cotus!,Where’s Cotus? My master calls for him. Cotus!
Appear not like a guest.,"This is a good house. The feast smells good, but I don’t look like a guest."
"What would you have, friend? whence are you? Here’s no place for you: pray, go to the door.","What are you doing here, friend? Where are you from? This is no place for you. Please leave."
"I have deserved no better entertainment,",I wouldn’t be welcomed any better if they knew I were Coriolanus.
"Whence are you, sir? Has the porter his eyes in his head; that he gives entrance to such companions? Pray, get you out.","Where are you from, sir? Is the porter blind to let someone like you in? Please, get out."
Away!,Go away!
Away! get you away.,You go away!
Now thou’rt troublesome.,You’re causing trouble.
Are you so brave? I’ll have you talked with anon.,Are you really this arrogant? Someone’s going to come reprimand you right away.
What fellow’s this?,Who’s this?
A strange one as ever I looked on: I cannot get him,The strangest man I’ve ever seen. I can’t get him out of the house. Please ask my master to come here.
"What have you to do here, fellow? Pray you, avoid the house.","Why are you here, fellow? Please, leave this house."
Let me but stand; I will not hurt your hearth.,Let me stay. I won’t cause any harm.
What are you?,Who are you?
A gentleman.,A gentleman.
A marvellous poor one.,A remarkably poor one.
"True, so I am.",That’s true. I am poor.
"Pray you, poor gentleman, take up some other station; here’s no place for you; pray you, avoid: come.","Please, poor gentleman, go to some other house. This is not the place for you. Please, get out now."
"Follow your function, go, and batten on cold bits.",Be like every other servant: go gorge yourself on cold scraps of food.
"What, you will not? Prithee, tell my master what a strange guest he has here.","What won’t you do? Please, go tell my master what a strange guest he has here."
And I shall.,I will.
Where dwellest thou?,Where do you live?
Under the canopy.,Beneath the stars.
Under the canopy!,Beneath the stars!
Ay.,Yes.
Where’s that?,Where’s that?
I’ the city of kites and crows.,In the city of kites and crows.
Then thou dwellest with daws too?,In the city of kites and crows! What a joke this is! Then do you live with the simpletons too?
"No, I serve not thy master.","No, I don’t serve your master."
"How, sir! do you meddle with my master?","Oh, sir! Are you trying to mess with my master?"
"Ay; ’tis an honester service than to meddle with thy trencher, hence!",Yes. It’s more honest than messing around with your mistress. You babble on and on. Pass the serving platter. Go!
Where is this fellow?,Where is this man?
"Here, sir: I’ld have beaten him like a dog, but for disturbing the lords within.","Here, sir. I would’ve beaten him like a dog, but that would’ve disturbed your guests."
"Why speak’st not? speak, man: what’s thy name?","Where are you from? What do you want? Your name? Why aren’t you speaking? Speak, man. What’s your name?"
"If, Tullus,","If, Tullus (umuffling his voice), you don’t recognize my voice and you don’t recognize me by sight, I must tell you my name."
"O Martius, Martius! A root of ancient envy. If Jupiter Should from yond cloud speak divine things, And say ‘’Tis true,’ I’ld not believe them more Than thee, all noble Martius. Let me twine My grained ash an hundred times hath broke And scarr’d the moon with splinters: here I clip The anvil of my sword, and do contest As hotly and as nobly with thy love Contend against thy valour. Know thou first, I loved the maid I married; never man Sigh’d truer breath; but that I see thee here, Thou noble thing! more dances my rapt heart Bestride my threshold. Why, thou Mars! I tell thee, We have a power on foot; and I had purpose Once more to hew thy target from thy brawn, Or lose mine arm fort: thou hast beat me out Dreamt of encounters ’twixt thyself and me; We have been down together in my sleep, Unbuckling helms, fisting each other’s throat, And waked half dead with nothing. Worthy Martius, Thou art thence banish’d, we would muster all From twelve to seventy, and pouring war Into the bowels of ungrateful Rome, Like a bold flood o’er-bear. O, come, go in, Who now are here, taking their leaves of me, Who am prepared against your territories, Though not for Rome itself.","Oh, Martius, Martius! Each word that you’ve spoken has weeded from my heart a root of longstanding hatred. If from that far cloud Jupiter should speak divine things and say, “It’s true,” I would believe him no less than I believe you, noble Martius. Let me wrap my arms around this body of yours, which my wooden lance has beaten and been splintered against a hundred times. You are the anvil that my sword used to strike, and now I embrace you. Now I strive to gain your comradeship with as much ferocity and honor as I used to fight you. You should know: I loved the woman I married, that’s the truth, but seeing you here, you noble thing, makes my heart more enraptured than when I first saw my new bride walk across my threshold. You are the god of war! I tell you, our army is ready to deploy, and now I have reason again to force your shield off of your strong arm, or lose my own arm instead. You’ve defeated me twelve different times, and every night since I have dreamed of encounters between us. We’d fight down on the ground, taking off our helmets, forcing our fists into each other’s throats. Then I wake up, half dead, and it was all a dream. Worthy Martius, even if we had no reason to attack Rome other than the fact that you’ve been banished, we would assemble every man from ages twelve to seventy and flood ungrateful Rome with our fury. Come inside now and shake hands with our senators. They are just now saying goodbye to me, as I was about to attack Roman territories, though not Rome itself."
"You bless me, gods!","You bless me, gods!"
"The leading of thine own revenges, take The one half of my commission; and set down— As best thou art experienced, since thou know’st Thy country’s strength and weakness,—thine own ways; Or rudely visit them in parts remote, To fright them, ere destroy. But come in: Let me commend thee first to those that shall Say yea to thy desires. A thousand welcomes! Yet, Martius, that was much. Your hand: most welcome!","Incomparable sir, if you’d like to take the lead with your own revenge, take over half of my command. Because you have the most experience and you know Rome’s strengths and weaknesses, decide for yourself whether to attack the city directly at the gates or to sneak up on them in the faraway territories and frighten them before destroying them. Either way, come in. Let me introduce you to those who will approve of your desires. A thousand welcomes! You’re more of a friend now than you were ever an enemy—and you were a great enemy. Give me your hand—you are most welcome!"
Here’s a strange alteration!,That was an unexpected turn of events!
"By my hand, I had thought to have strucken him with a cudgel; and yet my mind gave me his clothes made a","I swear, I had thought about striking him with a club, but I knew his clothes were a disguise."
"What an arm he has! he turned me about with his finger and his thumb, as one would set up a top.","What an arm he has! He turned me around with just his finger and his thumb, the way you’d spin a top."
"Nay, I knew by his face that there was something in him: he had, sir, a kind of face, methought,—I","No, I knew by his face that there was something about him. He had, sir, a kind of face, I thought—I don’t know how to describe it."
"He had so; looking as it were—would I were hanged, but I thought there was more in him than I could think.","He had a kind of face that looked like it was—I can’t find the words for the life of me, but I knew there was more to him than I could see."
"So did I, I’ll be sworn: he is simply the rarest man i’ the world.","So did I. I swear, he is simply the most unique man in the world."
I think he is: but a greater soldier than he you wot on.,"I agree, but you already know a better soldier."
"Who, my master?","Who, my master?"
"Nay, it’s no matter for that.",It’s no contest.
Worth six on him.,He’s worth six of him.
"Nay, not so neither: but I take him to be the",That’s not true. I think he’s the better soldier.
"Faith, look you, one cannot tell how to say that: for the defence of a town, our general is excellent.","How could anyone ever say who’s actually better? For defending towns, our general is excellent."
"Ay, and for an assault too.","Yes, and for attacking them, too."
"O slaves, I can tell you news,—news, you rascals!","Oh, slaves, I have news for you—news, you rascals!"
"What, what, what? let’s partake.","What, what, what? Tell us."
"I would not be a Roman, of all nations; I had as lieve be a condemned man.",I’d rather be from anywhere than Rome. I’d gladly prefer to be condemned to die.
Wherefore? wherefore?,Why? Why?
"Why, here’s he that was wont to thwack our general,","Because Caius Martius, the man who was inclined to thwack our general, is here."
Why do you say ‘thwack our general’?,"What do you mean, “thwack our general”?"
I do not say ‘thwack our general;’ but he was always good enough for him.,"I don’t mean “thwack our general,” but he could have."
"Come, we are fellows and friends: he was ever too","Come, we’re fellows and friends. Caius Martius was always too much for him—I’ve heard him say so himself."
"He was too hard for him directly, to say the troth on’t: before Corioli he scotched him and notched him like a carbon ado.","He was too much for him directly, to tell the truth. At Corioles he carved him up like a piece of meat."
"An he had been cannibally given, he might have","If he’d been a cannibal, he might have broiled and eaten him, too."
"But, more of thy news?",But what other news do you have?
"Why, he is so made on here within, as if he were son and heir to Mars; set at upper end o’ the table; no question asked him by any of the senators, but they mistress of him: sanctifies himself with’s hand and turns up the white o’ the eye to his discourse. But the bottom of the news is that our general is cut i’ the middle and but one half of what he was and grant of the whole table. He’ll go, he says, and sowl the porter of Rome gates by the ears: he will mow all down before him, and leave his passage polled.","The guests here can’t stop talking about him. It’s as if he were the son and heir to Mars. He’s sitting at the head of the table and none of the senators are asking him any questions—they’ve all taken their hats off to him. Our general himself treats him like a mistress, touching his hand like a sacred relic, listening with wide-eyed wonder to his every word. But the bottom line is that our general is now half the man he was yesterday. He’s given half his power away to Caius Martius and the whole table supports him. He says that he’ll go and catch the keeper of Rome’s gates by the ears, that he’ll mow down whoever stands in his way, leaving a trail behind him."
And he’s as like to do’t as any man I can imagine.,And he’s as likely to do it as any man I can imagine.
"many friends as enemies; which friends, sir, as it were, durst not, look you, sir, show themselves, as we term it, his friends whilst he’s in directitude.","Do it! He’ll do it. Look, sir, he has as many friends as enemies—and his friends can’t actually be friends to him while he’s in dejectitude."
Directitude! what’s that?,Dejectitude! What’s that?
"and the man in blood, they will out of their burrows, like conies after rain, and revel all with him.","But when they see that his spirits have lifted and that he’s a man in full vitality again, they’ll come out of hiding, like rabbits after a rain, and celebrate with him."
But when goes this forward?,When will this happen?
"drum struck up this afternoon: ’tis, as it were, a parcel of their feast, and to be executed ere they wipe their lips.","Tomorrow, today, soon. You’ll hear the battle drum by this afternoon. It’s like part of their feast and will be underway before they’ve wiped their lips."
"Why, then we shall have a stirring world again. tailors, and breed ballad-makers.",Then things will come back to life again here. This peace does nothing but rust iron and make people become tailors and singers.
"Let me have war, say I; it exceeds peace as far as day does night; it’s spritely, waking, audible, and full of vent. Peace is a very apoplexy, lethargy; bastard children than war’s a destroyer of men.","I say: give me war. It’s better than peace the way night is better than day. It’s spritely, waking, loud, and spirited. Peace is the definition of stagnation, of lethargy. It’s dull, deaf, sleepy, and unfeeling. It creates more bastard children than wars destroy men."
"’Tis so: and as war, in some sort, may be said to be a ravisher, so it cannot be denied but peace is a great maker of cuckolds.","It’s true. And while war can be said to be seductive in a sense, it cannot be denied that in times of peace, wives cheat on their husbands."
"Ay, and it makes men hate one another.","Yes, and it makes men hate one another."
"Reason; because they then less need one another. The wars for my money. I hope to see Romans as cheap as Volscians. They are rising, they are rising. ALL","Because they need one another less. I’d give my money to have war! I hope the Romans are as cheap as the Volsces. (A noise comes from offstage) They’re getting up from the table. ALL In, in, in, in!"
"We hear not of him, neither need we fear him; His remedies are tame i’ the present peace And quietness of the people, which before Were in wild hurry. Here do we make his friends Though they themselves did suffer by’t, behold Dissentious numbers pestering streets than see Our tradesmen with in their shops and going About their functions friendly.","We haven’t heard about him, so we don’t need to fear him. It would be easy to deal with him now, given the peace and quietness of the people, who were in such chaos before. Now we’re making his friends blush because things are going so smoothly. His friends are the ones who would’ve chosen—to their own detriment—to see people arguing in the streets rather than have our tradesmen back in their shops and happily doing their jobs."
We stood to’t in good time.,We turned things around quickly.
Is this Menenius?,Is this Menenius?
"’Tis he, ’tis he: O, he is grown most kind of late.","It’s him, it’s him. He has become very kind lately."
Hail sir!,"Greetings, sir!"
Hail to you both!,Greetings to you both!
"Is not much miss’d, but with his friends: The commonwealth doth stand, and so would do, Were he more angry at it.",Coriolanus is not missed much by anyone but his friends now. The people would rise up against him if he were still angry at them.
"All’s well; and might have been much better, if",That’s good. But things would have gone much better if he could have compromised.
"Where is he, hear you?",Where is he? Have you heard?
"Nay, I hear nothing: his mother and his wife Hear nothing from him.","No, I hear nothing. His mother and his wife hear nothing from him."
The gods preserve you both!,The gods preserve you both!
"God-den, our neighbours.","Good evening, neighbors."
"God-den to you all, god-den to you all.","Good evening to you all, good evening to you all."
"Ourselves, our wives, and children, on our knees, Are bound to pray for you both.","Ourselves, our wives, and children, on our knees, keep you both in our prayers."
"Live, and thrive!",Live and thrive!
Had loved you as we did.,"Farewell, kind neighbors. We wished Coriolanus had cared for you as much as we do."
Now the gods keep you!,Now the gods keep you!
"Farewell, farewell.","Farewell, farewell."
This is a happier and more comely time Crying confusion.,"This is a happier and more pleasant time than when the people ran in the streets, shouting their wild demands."
"Caius Martius was A worthy officer i’ the war; but insolent, O’ercome with pride, ambitious past all thinking,","Caius Martius was a brave officer in the war, but he was stubborn, overcome with pride, unreasonably ambitious, narcissistic . . ."
"And affecting one sole throne, Without assistance.",And he thought there should be only one governing body without any counterbalancing powers.
I think not so.,I don’t think that’s so.
"We should by this, to all our lamentation,","If despite our protests he had become consul, we would know this to be true by now."
"The gods have well prevented it, and Rome Sits safe and still without him.","The gods have skillfully prevented it, and Rome sits safe and sound without him."
"Worthy tribunes, There is a slave, whom we have put in prison, Are enter’d in the Roman territories, And with the deepest malice of the war Destroy what lies before ’em.","Worthy tribunes, we’ve just put a slave in prison who says that the Volsces, in two separate armies, have entered Roman territories and are furiously destroying everything in sight."
"’Tis Aufidius, Thrusts forth his horns again into the world; Which were inshell’d when Martius stood for Rome, And durst not once peep out.","It’s Aufidius. Hearing of Martius’s banishment, he’s thrusting his horns into the world again. When Martius defended Rome, Aufidius was contained and didn’t once dare to strike out."
"Come, what talk you",Why are you talking about Martius now?
Go see this rumourer whipp’d. It cannot be The Volsces dare break with us.,Go stop this rumor. The Volsces can’t have dared to break our peace treaty.
"Cannot be! We have record that very well it can, Within my age. But reason with the fellow, Before you punish him, where he heard this, Lest you shall chance to whip your information And beat the messenger who bids beware","They can’t? We’ve seen many times that they very well can, three times within my own lifetime in fact. Talk with the prisoner before you beat him. Find out where he heard this. Don’t run the risk of punishing the informant who warns you of dreaded news."
Tell not me: I know this cannot be.,Don’t tell me what to do. I know this can’t be true.
Not possible.,It’s not possible.
The nobles in great earnestness are going That turns their countenances.,The nobles are all hurrying to the Senate house. Some news has come that’s making them scowl.
"’Tis this slave;— Go whip him, ’fore the people’s eyes:—his raising; Nothing but his report.",It’s this slave. Go whip him in public view. He’s incited everyone with just his report.
"The slave’s report is seconded; and more, More fearful, is deliver’d.","Worthy sir, the slave’s report has been confirmed, and the news is worse than we feared."
What more fearful?,What could be worse?
"It is spoke freely out of many mouths— Join’d with Aufidius, leads a power ’gainst Rome, And vows revenge as spacious as between The young’st and oldest thing.","Many people, though I don’t know how much they actually know, are openly declaring that Martius has joined with Aufidius and is leading an army against Rome and that he vows revenge on everyone alive."
This is most likely!,This is highly likely!
Good Martius home again.,The weak common people have only been incited in order to welcome Martius home again.
The very trick on’t.,It’s a trick.
This is unlikely: He and Aufidius can no more atone,That’s unlikely. He and Aufidius can’t agree on anything other than to fight each other.
"You are sent for to the senate: A fearful army, led by Caius Martius Associated with Aufidius, rages Upon our territories; and have already What lay before them.","You’ve been called to the Senate. A frightening army, led by Caius Martius and in conjunction with Aufidius, rages in our territories. They’ve already overcome everything in their way, burned it, and took whatever was left."
"O, you have made good work!","(to the tribunes) Oh, this is all your fault!"
What news? what news?,What news do you have? What news?
"You have holp to ravish your own daughters and To see your wives dishonour’d to your noses,—","You’ve helped to rape your own daughters and melt the city’s lead roofs on your own heads, to see your wives dishonored before your own eyes—"
What’s the news? what’s the news?,What’s the news? What’s the news?
"Your temples burned in their cement, and Your franchises, whereon you stood, confined","Your temples have been burned down to their foundations, and your political power reduced to the size of a pinhole."
"Pray now, your news? You have made fair work, I fear me.—Pray, your news?— If Martius should be join’d with Volscians,—","Please, give us your news now. You’ve made your point, What’s your news? If Martius has joined with Volsces—"
"If! Made by some other deity than nature, That shapes man better; and they follow him, Against us brats, with no less confidence Than boys pursuing summer butterflies,","If? Then he is their god. He leads them as if he were a thing made by some other deity than nature, one that makes stronger men. And they follow him, against us children, with the confidence of boys pursuing summer butterflies or butchers killing flies."
"You have made good work, You and your apron-men; you that stood so up much on the voice of occupation and The breath of garlic-eaters!","(to the tribunes) This is all your doing, you and the tradesmen you represent. You that built your power on the workmen’s votes and the wishes of the lower class!"
Your Rome about your ears.,He’ll bring Rome to its knees.
As Hercules Did shake down mellow fruit. You have made fair work!,The city is ready to fall like the ripe fruits Hercules had to shake down from the trees. You are responsible for all of this!
"But is this true, sir?","But is this true, sir?"
"Ay; and you’ll look pale Before you find it other. All the regions Do smilingly revolt; and who resist Are mock’d for valiant ignorance, Your enemies and his find something in him.","Yes, and you’ll be dead before it’s otherwise. All the regions are revolting. Whoever resists is mocked for their ignorant courage and then killed as a loyal fool. Who can blame Martius? Your enemies and his find something in him."
"We are all undone, unless The noble man have mercy.",We’re all doomed unless he has mercy on us.
"Who shall ask it? Deserve such pity of him as the wolf Does of the shepherds: for his best friends, if they Should say ‘Be good to Rome,’ they charged him even As those should do that had deserved his hate,","Who will ask him for mercy? The tribunes are too ashamed, the people deserve his pity like the wolf deserves the shepherds’, and as for his best friends, if they were to ask him to “be good to Rome,” they would be asking of him what his enemies ought to ask, and that would make them appear to be his enemies."
"’Tis true: If he were putting to my house the brand That should consume it, I have not the face To say ‘Beseech you, cease.’ You have made fair hands,","It’s true. If he were about to burn my house, I wouldn’t be bold enough to say, “I beg you, stop.” You and your crafty ways! You’ve crafted a real mess here!"
"You have brought A trembling upon Rome, such as was never So incapable of help.",You’ve brought to Rome a panic without remedy like never before.
Say not we brought it.,We didn’t bring it.
"And cowardly nobles, gave way unto your clusters, Who did hoot him out o’ the city.","What? How is it our fault? We supported him but, like beasts and cowardly nobles, we gave way into your crowds of people who drove him out of the city."
"But I fear They’ll roar him in again. Tullus Aufidius, As if he were his officer: desperation Is all the policy, strength and defence, That Rome can make against them.","But I fear the crowds will roar him in again. Tullus Aufidius, the second most famous warrior, obeys Martius’s orders as if he were his officer. Desperation is the only defense that Rome can make against them."
"Here come the clusters. That made the air unwholesome, when you cast Your stinking greasy caps in hooting at Coriolanus’ exile. Now he’s coming; And not a hair upon a soldier’s head As you threw caps up will he tumble down, And pay you for your voices. ’Tis no matter; if he could burn us all into one coal, We have deserved it.","Here come the crowds. Is Aufidius with him? You’re the ones that made the air unwholesome when you tossed up your stinking greasy caps, hooting at Coriolanus’s exile. Now he’s coming, and there’s not a hair on a soldier’s head that won’t become a whip. He’ll cut off every fool’s head that had tossed up a hat to repay you for your votes. If he could burn us all into one coal, we would deserve it."
"Faith, we hear fearful news.","Wait, we hear frightening news."
"For mine own part, When I said, banish him, I said ’twas pity.","At least for me, when I said banish him, I said it out of pity."
And so did I.,And so did I.
"And so did I; and, to say the truth, so did very though we willingly consented to his banishment, yet it was against our will.","THIRD CITIZEN And so did I. In truth, so did most of us. What we did, we did for the best. And though we agreed to his banishment, it wasn’t what we wanted."
"Ye are goodly things, you voices!",You’re making excuses for yourselves!
You have made,"You’ve made a mess, you and your pack! Should we go to the capitol?"
"O, ay, what else?","Yes, where else?"
"Go, masters, get you home; be not dismay’d: These are a side that would be glad to have This true which they so seem to fear. Go home,","Go, masters, get yourselves home. Don’t be dismayed. These people are a faction that would happily have these fears come true. Go home, and show no sign of fear."
"The gods be good to us! Come, masters, let’s home. I ever said we were i’ the wrong when we banished him.","May the gods be good to us! Come, masters, let’s go home. I always said we were wrong to banish him."
"So did we all. But, come, let’s home.","We all did. But come, let’s go home."
I do not like this news.,I don’t like this news.
Nor I.,Nor do I.
Let’s to the Capitol. Would half my wealth Would buy this for a lie!,Let’s go to the capitol. I’d give half my wealth for this to be a lie!
"Pray, let us go.",Let’s go.
Do they still fly to the Roman?,Do they still obey the Roman?
"I do not know what witchcraft’s in him, but Your soldiers use him as the grace ’fore meat, Their talk at table, and their thanks at end; Even by your own.","I don’t know what spell he has them under, but your soldiers pray to him before eating, talk about him throughout their meal, and thank him at the end. And you are being overlooked, sir, by your own men."
"I cannot help it now, Unless, by using means, I lame the foot Of our design. He bears himself more proudlier, When first I did embrace him: yet his nature In that’s no changeling; and I must excuse What cannot be amended.","I can’t help that now, not without risking our plan. He carries himself more proudly, even in front of me, than I thought he would when I decided to join with him. But that’s always been his nature, and I have to excuse what can’t be changed."
"Yet I wish, sir,— Join’d in commission with him; but either Had borne the action of yourself, or else To him had left it solely.","Yet I wish, sir—I mean for you personally—that you hadn’t shared your command with him. I wish either that you had been the commander yourself, or else that you had given him the sole command."
"I understand thee well; and be thou sure, What I can urge against him. Although it seems, And so he thinks, and is no less apparent To the vulgar eye, that he bears all things fairly. And shows good husbandry for the Volscian state, As draw his sword; yet he hath left undone That which shall break his neck or hazard mine, Whene’er we come to our account.","I understand. Rest assured that he must answer for what he’s done, and he doesn’t know what I can accuse him of. While to the naked eye it seems, and he thinks, that he’s behaving fairly and that he’s taking good care of the Volscian state by fighting like a dragon and achieving victory as soon as he draws his sword, there’s something he has failed to do that will break his neck or risk mine, whenever we come to our reconciliation."
"Sir, I beseech you, think you he’ll carry Rome?","Sir, I beg you, do you think he’ll conquer Rome?"
"And the nobility of Rome are his: The senators and patricians love him too: The tribunes are no soldiers; and their people Will be as rash in the repeal, as hasty As is the osprey to the fish, who takes it By sovereignty of nature. First he was A noble servant to them; but he could not Carry his honours even: whether ’twas pride, The happy man; whether defect of judgment, To fail in the disposing of those chances Which he was lord of; or whether nature, Not to be other than one thing, not moving Even with the same austerity and garb As he controll’d the war; but one of these— As he hath spices of them all, not all, For I dare so far free him—made him fear’d, To choke it in the utterance. So our virtues Lie in the interpretation of the time: And power, unto itself most commendable, Hath not a tomb so evident as a chair One fire drives out one fire; one nail, one nail; Rights by rights falter, strengths by strengths do fail. Come, let’s away. When, Caius, Rome is thine, Thou art poor’st of all; then shortly art thou mine.","Wherever he goes, they yield to him before he begins to attack. The young nobles of Rome, the senators, and the patricians all support him. The tribunes aren’t soldiers, and their people will be as quick to reverse their judgment of him as they were to throw him out. I think he’ll be to Rome like the fish hawk is to the fish: the fish will submit by its nature. At first he was a noble servant to them, but he couldn’t handle the honors bestowed upon him. Whether it was pride—winning in battle all the time always makes men prideful—or whether it was a failure of judgment that he was unable to take advantage of the opportunities he had, or whether it was just his nature not to evolve from wearing the helmet of a soldier to the sitting on the cushion of a senator, to command peace in the same austere way that he commanded the wars. One of these—he has some of each but none in their entirety—caused him to be feared and so despised that he was banished. But all his merits should stop us from listing his faults. Time will tell whether one is judged as virtuous. Powerful men think their power is praiseworthy, but nothing destroys power faster than publicly proclaiming it. One fire burns out another, one nail hammers out another nail, and righteousness and strength crumble under their own weight. Come, let’s go. Caius, when Rome is yours, you will be the poorest of them all. And then you’ll be mine."
"No, I’ll not go: you hear what he hath said Which was sometime his general; who loved him In a most dear particular. He call’d me father: But what o’ that? Go, you that banish’d him; The way into his mercy: nay, if he coy’d To hear Cominius speak, I’ll keep at home.","No, I won’t go. You heard what his former general said, the one who loved him most dearly. He called me father. But so what? Go, you that banished him, and fall down on your knees a mile before his tent and crawl to him, begging for mercy. No, if he refused to listen to Cominius, I’ll stay at home."
He would not seem to know me.,He acted as if he didn’t know me.
Do you hear?,Do you hear?
"I urged our old acquaintance, and the drops That we have bled together. Coriolanus He would not answer to: forbad all names; He was a kind of nothing, titleless, Of burning Rome.","He called me by my name only once, and I reminded him of our relationship and the blood we’ve shed together. He wouldn’t answer to “Coriolanus” or any other name. He was a kind of nothing, titleless, until he had forged himself a name out of the fire of burning Rome."
"Why, so: you have made good work! A pair of tribunes that have rack’d for Rome, To make coals cheap,—a noble memory!","Well now, this is all your doing! A pair of tribunes that have brought down the price of coal by letting Rome be burned—what a noble way to be remembered!"
"When it was less expected: he replied, It was a bare petition of a state To one whom they had punish’d.",I reminded him how noble it was to grant pardons when they are least expected. He replied that it was an insufficient plea from the state that exiled him.
Very well:,That’s fair for him to say.
"I offer’d to awaken his regard For’s private friends: his answer to me was, He could not stay to pick them in a pile Of noisome musty chaff: he said ’twas folly, And still to nose the offence.","I tried to make him think of his personal friends. His answer to me was that he couldn’t stop to pick them out from a pile of offensive, musty chaff. He said it was foolish to spare one or two poor grains from being burned and still smell the stink."
"For one poor grain or two! I am one of those; his mother, wife, his child, And this brave fellow too, we are the grains: Above the moon: we must be burnt for you.","For one poor grain or two! I am one of those. His mother, his wife, his child, and this brave fellow, too—we are the grains. You are the musty chaff. Your stink can be smelled above the moon, and we must be burnt for you."
"Nay, pray, be patient: if you refuse your aid In this so never-needed help, yet do not Upbraid’s with our distress. But, sure, if you More than the instant army we can make, Might stop our countryman.","No, please, be patient. If you refuse to help when it’s most needed, don’t lecture us while we’re in distress. If you’d plead on your country’s behalf, surely your good words would do more to stop our countryman than any army we could raise."
"No, I’ll not meddle.","No, I won’t get involved."
"Pray you, go to him.","Please, go to him."
What should I do?,What would I do?
"Only make trial what your love can do For Rome, towards Martius.",See what your kindness toward Martius can do for Rome.
"Well, and say that Martius Return me, as Cominius is return’d, But as a discontented friend, grief-shot With his unkindness? say’t be so?","All right, but what if Martius sends me back without listening to me, as he did with Cominius? What then? I’ll come back simply as a disappointed friend, grief-stricken with his unkindness? What if that happens?"
"Yet your good will must have that thanks from Rome, after the measure","No, Rome will thank you for your efforts because you intended well."
"I’ll undertake ’t: I think he’ll hear me. Yet, to bite his lip And hum at good Cominius, much unhearts me. He was not taken well; he had not dined: We pout upon the morning, are unapt To give or to forgive; but when we have stuff’d These and these conveyances of our blood With wine and feeding, we have suppler souls Till he be dieted to my request, And then I’ll set upon him.","I’ll try. I think he’ll listen to me. But it discourages me that he bit his lip and hummed at good Cominius. Martius wasn’t approached skillfully—he hadn’t eaten. When the veins are empty, our blood is cold, and then our outlook on the day is sour. We are unlikely to give or to forgive. But when we have stuffed ourselves with food and wine, we become more flexible than when we’re stiff with hunger. So before I ask him, I’ll be sure that he has eaten and is therefore likely to grant my request."
"You know the very road into his kindness, And cannot lose your way.",You know exactly how to access his kindness. You can’t fail.
Speed how it will. I shall ere long have knowledge Of my success.,"Have faith. Whatever happens, I’ll try to convince him. I’ll know soon enough whether I have succeeded."
He’ll never hear him.,Martius will never listen to him.
Not?,No?
"Red as ’twould burn Rome; and his injury The gaoler to his pity. I kneel’d before him; ’Twas very faintly he said ‘Rise;’ dismiss’d me Thus, with his speechless hand: what he would do, Bound with an oath to yield to his conditions: So that all hope is vain. Unless his noble mother, and his wife; Who, as I hear, mean to solicit him And with our fair entreaties haste them on.","I tell you, he’s sitting on a golden throne, and his eyes are red enough to burn Rome, and his feeling of having been wronged overwhelms his pity. I knelt before him, and he very quietly said, “Rise,” and without a word, he waved for me to leave. He sent me a letter saying what he will do, and he has sworn not to yield on his conditions. There is no hope unless, as I hear, his noble mother and his wife are able to convince him to have mercy on his country. So let’s go then and urge them to hurry."
Stay: whence are you?,Stop there. Who are you?
"Stand, and go back.",Stop and go back.
"You guard like men; ’tis well: but, by your leave, I am an officer of state, and come","You’re good guards, but I assure you that I’m an officer of the state, and I’ve come to speak with Coriolanus."
From whence?,Where are you from?
From Rome.,From Rome.
"You may not pass, you must return: our general Will no more hear from thence.",You may not pass. You must return. Our general won’t listen to Romans anymore.
You’ll speak with Coriolanus.,You’ll see your Rome consumed with fire before you’ll speak with Coriolanus.
"Good my friends, If you have heard your general talk of Rome, And of his friends there, it is lots to blanks,","Good men, if you’ve heard your general talk of Rome and of his friends there, you’ve undoubtedly heard my name: Menenius."
Be it so; go back: the virtue of your name Is not here passable.,"Even if that’s true, go back. You can’t get in here by virtue of your name."
"I tell thee, fellow, The general is my lover: I have been His name unparallel’d, haply amplified; For I have ever verified my friends, Of whom he’s chief, with all the size that verity Would without lapsing suffer: nay, sometimes, I have tumbled past the throw; and in his praise Have almost stamp’d the leasing: therefore, fellow, I must have leave to pass.","I tell you, fellow, the general is my close friend. I’ve recorded his brave acts and proclaimed, perhaps exaggeratedly, his greatness as unparalleled. I’ve always supported my friends, of whom he’s the closest, with the highest possible praise I could give without slipping into lies. Although it’s true that sometimes, like bowling on an uneven surface, I’ve thrown the ball too far and nearly praised him beyond his actual accomplishments. So you see, fellow, you must let me pass."
"Faith, sir, if you had told as many lies in his should not pass here; no, though it were as virtuous to lie as to live chastely. Therefore, go back.","Sir, if you’ve told as many lies on his behalf as you’ve spoken words that benefit yourself, you should not pass here. You act as if it were as virtuous to lie as it is to live honestly. Go back."
"Prithee, fellow, remember my name is Menenius, always factionary on the party of your general.","Please, fellow, remember my name is Menenius, and I’ve always been on your general’s side."
"have, I am one that, telling true under him, must say, you cannot pass. Therefore, go back.","Even if you’ve lied for him, as you say you have, I must follow his orders truthfully and say that you cannot pass. So go back."
"Has he dined, canst thou tell? for I would not speak with him till after dinner.","Has he eaten yet, could you tell me? Because I wouldn’t want to speak with him until after dinner."
"You are a Roman, are you?","You’re a Roman, are you?"
"I am, as thy general is.","I am, just as your general is."
"Then you should hate Rome, as he does. Can you, when you have pushed out your gates the very defender of them, and, in a violent popular front his revenges with the easy groans of old women, the virginal palms of your daughters, or with the palsied intercession of such a decayed dotant as you seem to be? Can you think to blow out the such weak breath as this? No, you are deceived; therefore, back to Rome, and prepare for your execution: you are condemned, our general has sworn you out of reprieve and pardon.","Then you should hate Rome the way he does. You’ve banished your greatest hero from your gates and, in a violent popular ignorance, given your best defender to your enemy. So how can you think to counteract his plan for revenge with the meaningless groans of old women, the prayers of your virgin daughters, or the crippled pleas of a decayed, senile old man such as yourself? You think you can blow out the fire that is about to engulf your city in flames with such weak breath as this? If so, you’re mistaken. Go back to Rome and prepare for your execution. You’re condemned, and our general has sworn to grant you no reprieve or pardon."
use me with estimation.,"Sirs, if your captain knew that I were here, he would treat me with respect."
"Come, my captain knows you not.","Come, my captain doesn’t know you."
"I mean, thy general.","I mean, your general."
"My general cares not for you. Back, I say, go; lest the utmost of your having: back.","My general doesn’t care about you. Go back, I say, before I spill a half pint of your blood. Back, this is as far you get. Back!"
"Nay, but, fellow, fellow,—","No, but, fellow, fellow—"
What’s the matter?,What’s going on?
"Now, you companion, I’ll say an errand for you: perceive that a Jack guardant cannot office me from my son Coriolanus: guess, but by my entertainment with him, if thou standest not i’ the state of hanging, or of some death more long in presently, and swoon for what’s to come upon thee.","Now, you fellow, I’ll give my version of what just happened here. You’ll know now that I’m well regarded by your general and that a lowly guard such as yourself can’t keep me from Coriolanus, he who is like a son to me. I wonder if after I talk with him, whether you’ll be hanged or killed more cruelly in some prolonged and public way. Watch now and worry for what’s going to happen to you."
"The glorious gods sit in hourly synod about thy particular prosperity, and love thee no worse than thy old father Menenius does! O my son, my son! water to quench it. I was hardly moved to come to thee; but being assured none but myself could move thee, I have been blown out of your gates with sighs; and conjure thee to pardon Rome, and thy wrath, and turn the dregs of it upon this varlet here,—this, who, like a block, hath denied my access to thee.","The glorious gods sit in hourly discussions about your personal prosperity, and they love you no less than your old father Menenius does! Oh, my son, my son! You’re preparing fire for us. Look, here’s water to quench it. I was grudgingly persuaded to come to you, but because they assured me that no one other than myself could convince you, I’ve been sent here from the gates with sighs and beg you to pardon Rome and your pleading countrymen. May the good gods calm your anger and turn the remains of it upon this villain here, who, like a block, has kept me from seeing you."
Away!,Away!
How! away!,"What do you mean, away?"
"Wife, mother, child, I know not. My affairs Are servanted to others: though I owe My revenge properly, my remission lies In Volscian breasts. That we have been familiar, Than pity note how much. Therefore, be gone. Mine ears against your suits are stronger than Your gates against my force. Yet, for I loved thee, Take this along; I writ it for thy sake","I have neither wife, nor mother, nor child. My personal life is now eclipsed by other matters. Though I seek my own revenge, the power to pardon belongs to the Volsces. We had a friendship, but your ungrateful failure to defend me has poisoned it. Pity will not remind me of what great friends we used to be. So go away. My ears rebuff your pleas with greater force than your gates will have against my army. But because I did care for you, take this. I wrote it for your sake."
"I will not hear thee speak. This man, Aufidius, Was my beloved in Rome: yet thou behold’st!","And would have sent it. I won’t hear you speak another word, Menenius. This man was my dearest friend in Rome, Aufidius. But look at him!"
You keep a constant temper.,You never change.
"Now, sir, is your name Menenius?","Now, sir, is your name Menenius?"
way home again.,"You see, it’s like a spell with great power. You know the way home again."
Do you hear how we are shent for keeping your greatness back?,Did you hear how they scolded us for keeping your greatness back?
"What cause, do you think, I have to swoon?","Why, do you think, I swoon?"
"such things as you, I can scarce think there’s any, ye’re so slight. He that hath a will to die by himself fears it not from another: let your general do his worst. For you, be that you are, long; and as I was said to, Away!","I don’t care about the world or about your general. I can barely think of things such as yourselves, you’re so insignificant. A suicidal man doesn’t fear being killed by someone else. Let your general do his worst. May you live long and may your misery increase with age! I say to you what was said to me: Away!"
"A noble fellow, I warrant him.","He’s a noble fellow, I say."
"The worthy fellow is our general: he’s the rock, the oak not to be wind-shaken.",The worthy fellow is our general. He’s like a rock or an oak that the wind can’t shake.
"We will before the walls of Rome tomorrow Set down our host. My partner in this action, You must report to the Volscian lords, how plainly I have borne this business.","Tomorrow we’ll lead our army to the walls of Rome. As my partner in this attack, you must report to the Volscian lords on how straightforwardly I’ve carried this out."
"You have respected; stopp’d your ears against The general suit of Rome; never admitted A private whisper, no, not with such friends That thought them sure of you.",You have respected their aims entirely and blocked your ears against the general plea of Rome. You’ve never had even a private whisper with your old friends who thought they might persuade you.
"Whom with a crack’d heart I have sent to Rome, Loved me above the measure of a father; Nay, godded me, indeed. Their latest refuge Was to send him; for whose old love I have, The first conditions, which they did refuse And cannot now accept; to grace him only That thought he could do more, a very little I have yielded to: fresh embassies and suits, Will I lend ear to. Ha! what shout is this?","This last old man, whom with a broken heart I’ve sent back to Rome, loved me better than a father. Indeed, he treated me like a god. Their last resort was to send him. Though I turned him away, out of love for him I again offered the same terms they had previously refused and now cannot accept. That is all I have yielded to he who thought that he could do more. I’ll no longer listen to any more pleas, made either by the state or by my private friends. Ha! What shout is this?"
Shall I be tempted to infringe my vow In the same time ’tis made? I will not.,Shall I be tempted to break my vow in the same moment that I made it? I will not.
"My wife comes foremost; then the honour’d mould The grandchild to her blood. But, out, affection! All bond and privilege of nature, break! Let it be virtuous to be obstinate. What is that curt’sy worth? or those doves’ eyes, Of stronger earth than others. My mother bows; As if Olympus to a molehill should In supplication nod: and my young boy Hath an aspect of intercession, which Plough Rome and harrow Italy: I’ll never Be such a gosling to obey instinct, but stand, As if a man were author of himself And knew no other kin.","Here comes my wife. Then my mother, the honorable mold from which I was cast. And in her hand, the grandchild of her blood. But affection be gone! And break all natural ties and obligations! Let it be virtuous to be unmovable.What is that curtsy worth? Or those doe eyes, which can make the gods break their vows? I melt, and I’m no stronger than anyone else. For my mother to bow to me is as if Mt. Olympus would plead before a molehill. And my young boy has an imploring look, which by nature I don’t want to deny. But let the Volsces destroy Rome and lay siege on Italy—I’ll never be so weak as to obey instinct. Instead I will stand firm, as if a man were his own creator and had no family."
My lord and husband!,My lord and husband!
These eyes are not the same I wore in Rome.,Everything looks different to me since I left Rome.
The sorrow that delivers us thus changed Makes you think so.,"If we look different to you, it’s because our suffering has changed us."
"Like a dull actor now, Even to a full disgrace. Best of my flesh, Forgive my tyranny; but do not say For that ‘Forgive our Romans.’ O, a kiss Long as my exile, sweet as my revenge! I carried from thee, dear; and my true lip Hath virgin’d it e’er since. You gods! I prate, And the most noble mother of the world Leave unsaluted: sink, my knee, i’ the earth;","Like a bad actor, I have forgotten my lines. To my complete disgrace, I don’t know what to say. My dear family, forgive my cruelty but don’t ask me to “Forgive our Romans.” (Virgilia kisses him) Oh, a kiss as long as my exile, and as sweet as my revenge! By the jealous queen of heaven, I kiss only you, my dear; my lips have always been faithful. You gods! Forgive me for not saluting the most noble mother of the world. Sink, my knee, to the earth."
Than that of common sons.,I must demonstrate a more profound sign of my duty than that of common sons.
"O, stand up blest! Whilst, with no softer cushion than the flint, I kneel before thee; and unproperly Between the child and parent.","Oh, stand up, blessed one! And let me, with no softer cushion than the stone floor, kneel before you. Though it’s inappropriate for me to pay respect to you—it is the child that should bow to the parent."
"What is this? Your knees to me? to your corrected son? Then let the pebbles on the hungry beach Strike the proud cedars ’gainst the fiery sun; Murdering impossibility, to make What cannot be, slight work.","What’s this? You’re kneeling before me, your chastised son? Then let the pebbles on the beach rise up the stars and let the mutinous winds blow the proud cedars into the fiery sun. Impossible things are now easily possible. (He helps her up.)"
Thou art my warrior;,You’re my warrior; I helped make you what you are. Do you recognize this woman?
"The noble sister of Publicola, The moon of Rome, chaste as the icicle That’s curdied by the frost from purest snow And hangs on Dian’s temple: dear Valeria!","The noble sister of the consul Publicola, the moon of Rome, pure as the icicle that forms from the frost of purest snow and hangs on Diana’s temple: dear Valeria!"
Which by the interpretation of full time May show like all yourself.,"(showing young Martius) Here is your miniature replica, who in time may grow to be exactly like you."
"The god of soldiers, With the consent of supreme Jove, inform To shame unvulnerable, and stick i’ the wars Like a great sea-mark, standing every flaw, And saving those that eye thee!","May the god of soldiers, with the consent of supreme Jove, make your thoughts be noble. And may you be invulnerable to shame, stand firm in the wars like a great beacon for sailors, enduring every sudden blast of wind and helping those that look to you for guidance!"
"Your knee, sirrah.","On your knee, sir. (young Martius kneels)"
That’s my brave boy!,That’s my brave boy!
"Even he, your wife, this lady, and myself, Are suitors to you.","Even he, your wife, this lady, and myself—plead before you."
"I beseech you, peace: Or, if you’ld ask, remember this before: Be held by you denials. Do not bid me Dismiss my soldiers, or capitulate Again with Rome’s mechanics: tell me not Wherein I seem unnatural: desire not Your colder reasons.","Please, stop. Or, if you must ask, remember this first: Don’t think that I deny you personally, but I cannot grant your pleas because I have sworn not to. Don’t ask me to dismiss my soldiers or to yield to the common people of Rome. Don’t tell me the ways in which I seem unnatural. Don’t try to mitigate my rage and need for vengeance with your colder reasons."
"O, no more, no more! You have said you will not grant us any thing; For we have nothing else to ask, but that That, if you fail in our request, the blame May hang upon your hardne therefore hear us.","Oh, no more, no more! You’ve said you won’t grant us anything. We have nothing else to ask other than what you’ve already refused. But we’ll ask that if you fail to grant our request, blame will be laid on your stubbornness. Therefore listen to us."
"Aufidius, and you Volsces, mark; for we’ll Hear nought from Rome in private. Your request?","Aufidius, and you Volsces, come here. We won’t listen to anything from Rome in private. What is your request?"
"And state of bodies would bewray what life We have led since thy exile. Think with thyself How more unfortunate than all living women Are we come hither: since that thy sight, Make our eyes flow with joy, hearts dance with comforts, Constrains them weep and shake with fear and sorrow; Making the mother, wife and child to see His country’s bowels out. And to poor we Thine enmity’s most capital: thou barr’st us Our prayers to the gods, which is a comfort That all but we enjoy; for how can we, Whereto we are bound, together with thy victory, Whereto we are bound? alack, or we must lose The country, our dear nurse, or else thy person, Our comfort in the country. We must find Our wish, which side should win: for either thou Must, as a foreign recreant, be led With manacles thorough our streets, or else triumphantly tread on thy country’s ruin, Thy wife and children’s blood. For myself, son, I purpose not to wait on fortune till These wars determine: if I cannot persuade thee Rather to show a noble grace to both parts March to assault thy country than to tread— Trust to’t, thou shalt not—on thy mother’s womb, That brought thee to this world.","Even if we were silent and didn’t speak, our clothing and the condition of our bodies would betray the lives we’ve led since your exile. Think how we three are worse off than all living women, because seeing you—a sight that should make our eyes flow with tears of joy and our hearts dance with relief—constrains our eyes from weeping and shakes our hearts with fear and sorrow to make the mother, wife, and child see the son, the husband, and the father tearing his country’s bowels out. Your hatred will kill us poor people. You deny our prayers to the gods, which is the only comfort we have, and if we can’t pray—and pray for our country—where will we go if you succeed, where will we go? Alas, either we must lose the country, our dear mother, or else we must lose you, our comfort in the country. We will inevitably face tragedy, but we do have a wish for one side to win. Either you must, as a traitor, be led with handcuffs thorough our streets, or else triumphantly march on your ruined country and wear the medal for having bravely shed your wife and children’s blood. For myself, son, I don’t intend to rely on fortune until these wars end. If I can’t persuade you to reach a noble compromise with both sides rather than seek total destruction, when you march to assault your country you’ll be treading—and believe me about this—on your mother’s womb, which brought you into this world."
"Ay, and mine, Living to time.","Yes, and mine that gave you this boy, to keep your name alive."
"A’ shall not tread on me; I’ll run away till I am bigger, but then I’ll fight.","You won’t tread on me. I’ll run away until I’m bigger, but then I’ll fight."
"Not of a woman’s tenderness to be, I have sat too long.",I’ll become tender like a woman if I look at your faces. I’ve sat too long.
"Nay, go not from us thus. If it were so that our request did tend To save the Romans, thereby to destroy As poisonous of your honour: no; our suit Is that you reconcile them: while the Volsces May say ‘This mercy we have show’d;’ the Romans, ‘This we received;’ and each in either side For making up this peace!’ Thou know’st, great son, The end of war’s uncertain, but this certain, That, if thou conquer Rome, the benefit Which thou shalt thereby reap is such a name, Whose chronicle thus writ: ‘The man was noble, But with his last attempt he wiped it out; Destroy’d his country, and his name remains To the ensuing age abhorr’d.’ Speak to me, son: To imitate the graces of the gods; To tear with thunder the wide cheeks o’ the air, And yet to charge thy sulphur with a bolt That should but rive an oak. Why dost not speak? Still to remember wrongs? Daughter, speak you: He cares not for your weeping. Speak thou, boy: Perhaps thy childishness will move him more Than can our reasons. There’s no man in the world Like one i’ the stocks. Thou hast never in thy life Show’d thy dear mother any courtesy, When she, poor hen, fond of no second brood, Has cluck’d thee to the wars and safely home, And spurn me back: but if it be not so, Thou art not honest; and the gods will plague thee, That thou restrain’st from me the duty which To a mother’s part belongs. He turns away: To his surname Coriolanus ’longs more pride Than pity to our prayers. Down: an end; This is the last: so we will home to Rome, And die among our neighbours. Nay, behold ’s: But kneels and holds up bands for fellowship, Does reason our petition with more strength Than thou hast to deny ’t. Come, let us go: This fellow had a Volscian to his mother; Like him by chance. Yet give us our dispatch: I am hush’d until our city be a-fire, And then I’ll speak a little.","No, don’t leave us now. If it were the case that our request was to save the Romans and thereby destroy the Volsces, whom you serve, you might condemn us for poisoning your honor. But no, our appeal is for you to reconcile with them so that the Volsces may say, “We have shown mercy,” and the Romans may say, “We received mercy,” and both sides will salute you and cry, “May you be blessed for making this peace!” You know, great son, that the outcome of war is uncertain. But it’s certain that if you conquer Rome, the benefit you’ll reap in so doing is a name whose repetition will be plagued with curses. You’ll be remembered with these words: “The man was noble, but with his last attack he gave up his nobility, destroyed his country, and his name remains forever hated.” Speak to me, son. You’ve aspired to great honor, to behave like a god, to tear apart the sky with thunder and yet throw your lightning bolt so that it would only split an oak. Why don’t you speak? Do you think it’s honorable for a noble man to always remember how he has been wronged? Daughter, speak—he doesn’t like your weeping. Speak, boy—perhaps your childishness will move him more than our reasons can. There’s no man in the world more tied to his mother, and yet here he lets me prattle on like a common criminal. Never in your life have you done your dear mother any favors, while she, poor woman, who didn’t want to have another child, has cared for you while you were at war and safely home, heaped with honors. If you think my request is unfair, then turn me down. But if it’s not, then you’re a liar and the gods will punish you for failing to give me what you owe me as a son. He turns away. Down, ladies. Let’s shame him by getting on our knees. His surname, Coriolanus, has more pride than pity for our prayers. Down! This is the end. (The women and young Martius kneel) We’ll go home to Rome and die among our neighbors. Wait, look. This boy, who doesn’t know what’s going to happen to him but kneels and holds up his hands for fellowship, lends more strength to our petition than you have strength to deny. Come, let’s go. This fellow has a Volscian mother, his wife is in Corioles, and his child looks just like him by chance. Send us away. I’ll be silent until our city is on fire, and then I’ll speak a little."
"O mother, mother! The gods look down, and this unnatural scene They laugh at. O my mother, mother! O! You have won a happy victory to Rome; But, for your son,—believe it, O, believe it, If not most mortal to him. But, let it come. Aufidius, though I cannot make true wars, I’ll frame convenient peace. Now, good Aufidius, Were you in my stead, would you have heard","(crying) Oh, mother, mother! What have you done? Look, the heavens are opening, the gods are looking down and laughing at this unnatural scene. Oh, my mother, mother! Oh! You have won a happy victory for Rome. But for your son—believe it, oh, believe it—because you have convinced him, he’s now in mortal danger. But let it come. Aufidius, though I cannot fight this war for you, I’ll make arrange a peaceful settlement, fair to both sides. Now, good Aufidius, if you were in my place, wouldn’t you have listened to your mother and done as I did, Aufidius?"
I was moved withal.,I was moved by what she said.
"I dare be sworn you were: And, sir, it is no little thing to make Mine eyes to sweat compassion. But, good sir, I’ll not to Rome, I’ll back with you; and pray you, Stand to me in this cause. O mother! wife!","I know you were! And, sir, it is no small achievement to make me cry tears of compassion. But, good sir, tell me that you’ll make peace. For my part, I won’t go to Rome—I’ll go back with you. And please, support me in this effort. Oh, mother! Wife!"
[Aside] I am glad thou hast set thy mercy and thy honour Myself a former fortune.,(aside) I’m glad you’ve distinguished between your mercy and your honor. I’ll be able to rebuild my former fortune because of that distinction.
"Ay, by and by;","Yes, so it will go. To Volumnia and Virgilia"
"But we will drink together; and you shall bear A better witness back than words, which we, Come, enter with us. Ladies, you deserve To have a temple built you: all the swords In Italy, and her confederate arms, Could not have made this peace.","But we’ll drink together, and you’ll bring back a signed peace treaty, not just our word. Come with us. Ladies, you deserve to have a temple built for you. All the swords of Italy and her allies couldn’t have made this peace."
"See you yond coign o’ the Capitol, yond corner-stone?","Do you see, beyond the corner of the capitol, beyond the cornerstone?"
"Why, what of that?",What is that?
"If it be possible for you to displace it with your Rome, especially his mother, may prevail with him. But I say there is no hope in’t: our throats are sentenced and stay upon execution.","If you can block it with your little finger, there is some hope that the ladies of Rome, especially his mother, might prevail with him. But I don’t think there is any hope. Our fate is sealed. Our throats wait to be slit."
Is’t possible that so short a time can alter the,Is it possible that a man can change so much in so short a time?
There is differency between a grub and a butterfly; yet your butterfly was a grub. This Martius is grown from man to dragon: he has wings; he’s more than a creeping thing.,"There’s a difference between a caterpillar and a butterfly, but butterflies were once caterpillars. This Martius has grown from man to dragon: he has wings—he’s more than a creeping thing."
He loved his mother dearly.,He loved his mother dearly.
"So did he me: and he no more remembers his mother now than an eight-year-old horse. The tartness of his face sours ripe grapes: when he walks, he moves like an engine, and the ground shrinks before his eye; talks like a knell, and his hum is a battery. He sits in his state, as a thing made for Alexander. What he bids be done is finished with his bidding. He wants nothing of a god but eternity","He also loved me. He won’t remember his mother any more than an eight-year-old horse would. The tartness of his face makes ripe grapes go sour. When he walks, he moves like a war machine, and the ground sinks beneath his feet. He’s able to pierce armor with his eye, he talks like a death knell, and his voice itself is an assault. He sits on his throne, looking like a statue of Alexander the Great. His orders are carried out as soon as he gives them. All that he lacks to be a god is immortality and a heaven to rule."
"Yes, mercy, if you report him truly.","He lacks the mercy of a god, if you’re telling the truth."
I paint him in the character. Mark what mercy his mother shall bring from him: there is no more mercy in him than there is milk in a male tiger; that you.,"I’m giving a sketch of his character. Let’s see how much mercy his mother gets out of him. There’s no more mercy in him than there is milk in a male tiger. Our poor city will soon find this out, and it’s all because of you."
The gods be good unto us!,May the gods be good to us!
"No, in such a case the gods will not be good unto us. When we banished him, we respected not them;","No, in this case the gods won’t be good to us. When we banished him, we dishonored them. And now he’s returning to break our necks, which shows that they don’t respect us."
"Sir, if you’ld save your life, fly to your house: The plebeians have got your fellow-tribune And hale him up and down, all swearing, if The Roman ladies bring not comfort home,","Sir, if you want to save your life, go home immediately. The people have taken custody of your fellow tribune and are hauling him up and down the street, all swearing that if the Roman ladies don’t return with a peaceful resolution, they’ll torture him to death."
What’s the news?,What’s the news?
"Good news, good news; the ladies have prevail’d, The Volscians are dislodged, and Martius gone: A merrier day did never yet greet Rome,","Good news, good news! The ladies have prevailed, the Volsces have retreated, and Martius is gone! Rome has never had a happier day. Not even the expulsion of the Tarquins tops this."
"Friend, Art thou certain this is true? is it most certain?","Friend, are you certain this is true? Is it absolutely certain?"
"As certain as I know the sun is fire: Where have you lurk’d, that you make doubt of it? As the recomforted through the gates. Why, hark you!","As certain as I know the sun is fire. Where have you been that you doubt it? The tide has never blown more quickly through an arch as this reassuring news has blown through the gates. Why, look here!"
"The trumpets, sackbuts, psalteries and fifes, Tabours and cymbals and the shouting Romans, Make the sun dance. Hark you!","The trumpets, trombones, strings and pipes, drums and cymbals, and the shouting Romans sparkle in the sun. Listen!"
"I will go meet the ladies. This Volumnia Is worth of consuls, senators, patricians, A city full; of tribunes, such as you, A sea and land full. You have pray’d well to-day: I’d not have given a doit. Hark, how they joy!","This is good news. I’ll go meet the ladies. This Volumnia is worth of a city full of consuls, senators, and patricians, and she’s worth a sea and land full of tribunes. You have prayed well today. This morning I thought the chance that you’d live was one in ten thousand. Look how happy they are!"
"First, the gods bless you for your tidings; next, Accept my thankfulness.","First, may the gods bless you for your good news, and then accept my thanks."
"Sir, we have all","Sir, we have all great cause to give great thanks."
They are near the city?,Are they near the city?
Almost at point to enter.,They’re just about to enter.
"We will meet them, And help the joy.",We’ll meet them and join the celebration.
"Behold our patroness, the life of Rome! Call all your tribes together, praise the gods, And make triumphant fires; strew flowers before them: Unshout the noise that banish’d Martius, Cry ‘Welcome, ladies, welcome!’","Behold our savior, the life of Rome! Call all your tribes together, praise the gods, and make triumphant fires. Throw flowers before them. Take back the cries that banished Martius and bring him back by welcoming his mother. Cry, “Welcome, ladies, welcome!”"
"Welcome, ladies, Welcome!","Welcome, ladies, welcome!"
"Go tell the lords o’ the city I am here: Deliver them this paper: having read it, Bid them repair to the market-place; where I, Even in theirs and in the commons’ ears, The city ports by this hath enter’d and Intends to appear before the people, hoping To purge herself with words: dispatch.","Go tell the lords of the city that I’m here. Give them this paper. Once they’ve read it, ask them to go to the marketplace. I’ll be there to confirm its truthfulness for them and for the common people. He whom I accuse has entered through the city’s gates and intends to appear before the people, hoping to explain himself with words. Hurry."
Most welcome!,Most welcome!
How is it with our general?,"How are you, general?"
"Even so As with a man by his own alms empoison’d, And with his charity slain.",Like a man destroyed by his own kindness and killed by his compassion.
"Most noble sir, You wish’d us parties, we’ll deliver you Of your great danger.","Most noble sir, if you still want to work together, we’ll rid you of your great threat."
"Sir, I cannot tell: We must proceed as we do find the people.","Sir, I don’t know yet. We must see how the people react."
’Twixt you there’s difference; but the fall of either Makes the survivor heir of all.,"The people won’t know how to react if there’s no rivalry between you two, but whoever loses leaves the other man with power over everything."
"I know it; And my pretext to strike at him admits Mine honour for his truth: who being so heighten’d, He water’d his new plants with dews of flattery, Seducing so my friends; and, to this end, He bow’d his nature, never known before","I know, and my reason for attacking him is well founded. I put him in this position of power, and I sacrificed my honor for his loyalty. He became so highly esteemed that he watered his new plants with the dew of flattery. He seduced my friends by changing his nature—he was never known before as anything other than rough, unswayable, and unrestrained."
"Sir, his stoutness When he did stand for consul, which he lost By lack of stooping,—","Sir, his stubbornness when he was being considered for consul is why he lost. He wouldn’t humble himself."
"That I would have spoke of: Presented to my knife his throat: I took him; Made him joint-servant with me; gave him way In all his own desires; nay, let him choose Out of my files, his projects to accomplish, In mine own person; holp to reap the fame Which he did end all his; and took some pride To do myself this wrong: till, at the last, I seem’d his follower, not partner, and I had been mercenary.","That’s what I was about to say: being banished for his stubbornness, he came to my house and put my knife to his throat. I took him in, made him joint commander of my army, let him do whatever he wanted. I even let him choose men from among my soldiers to carry out his agenda—my best and freshest men. I served his vision myself, helped him do the deeds that he took all the credit for. He wronged me in becoming so prideful. In the end, I looked like his follower, not his partner, and he treated me like I was just a soldier-for-hire."
"So he did, my lord: The army marvell’d at it, and, in the last, When he had carried Rome and that we look’d","That’s what he did, my lord. The army was astonished by it. And finally, when he was able to conquer Rome and we could have had the spoils and glory—"
"There was it: For which my sinews shall be stretch’d upon him. At a few drops of women’s rheum, which are As cheap as lies, he sold the blood and labour And I’ll renew me in his fall. But, hark!","That’s why I’ll use all my strength against him. He sold us out, forfeiting the blood and labor of our great plan because of a few drops of women’s tears, which are as worthless as lies. Therefore he must die, and I’ll reassert my power by taking him down. But look!"
"Your native town you enter’d like a post, And had no welcomes home: but he returns, Splitting the air with noise.",You returned home like a messenger—you weren’t properly welcomed. But he comes back to a loud celebration.
"Whose children he hath slain, their base throats tear With giving him glory.","And ignorant fools, whose children he has killed, tear their stupid throats as they sing his praises."
"Therefore, at your vantage, Ere he express himself, or move the people Which we will second. When he lies along, After your way his tale pronounced shall bury His reasons with his body.","Seize your opportunity now, before he speaks and convinces the people with whatever he plans to say. Let him feel your sword—we support you. When he lies dead, you can tell the people what he did from your perspective. His version of the story will be buried along with his body."
Say no more:,Say no more. Here come the lords.
You are most welcome home.,This celebration welcomes you home.
"I have not deserved it. But, worthy lords, have you with heed perused What I have written to you?","I don’t deserve it. But, worthy lords, have you carefully read the letter I wrote you?"
We have.,We have.
"And grieve to hear’t. What faults he made before the last, I think Might have found easy fines: but there to end Where he was to begin and give away With our own charge, making a treaty where There was a yielding,—this admits no excuse.","And we’re sad to hear it. Whatever mistakes he made before this last one, I think we could have forgiven with light punishment. But stopping the attack when it was about to begin, squandering the advantage of our army’ position, leaving us to pay the cost of raising that army, and making a peace treaty when the enemy was weak and could have been conquered—there’s no excuse for this."
He approaches: you shall hear him.,Here he comes. You’ll hear how he tells it.
"Hail, lords! I am return’d your soldier, Than when I parted hence, but still subsisting Under your great command. You are to know That prosperously I have attempted and With bloody passage led your wars even to Do more than counterpoise a full third part The charges of the action. We have made peace With no less honour to the Antiates Than shame to the Romans: and we here deliver, Together with the seal o’ the senate, what We have compounded on.","Hail, lords! I have returned as your soldier, no more loyal to my country than when I left here. I remain under your great command. You should know that I have successfully won the bloody battles that brought your army to the gates of Rome. The spoils we’ve brought home outweigh the bodies of those we killed by more than a third. We’ve made peace, which brings honor to the people of Antium as much as it shames the people of Rome. And we here present, signed by the Roman consuls and patricians, and with the seal of the Senate, the treaty we’ve agreed to."
"Read it not, noble lords; But tell the traitor, in the high’st degree","Don’t read it, noble lords. Instead, tell the traitor that he has abused your powers to the highest degree."
Traitor! how now!,Traitor! How’s that?
"Ay, traitor, Martius!","Yes, traitor, Martius!"
Martius!,“Martius”!
"Ay, Martius, Caius Martius: dost thou think Coriolanus in Corioli? You lords and heads o’ the state, perfidiously He has betray’d your business, and given up, For certain drops of salt, your city Rome, Breaking his oath and resolution like A twist of rotten silk, never admitting Counsel o’ the war, but at his nurse’s tears He whined and roar’d away your victory, Look’d wondering each at other.","Yes, “Martius.” Caius Martius. Do you think I’ll honor you with that stolen name, Coriolanus, that you took in Corioles? You lords and heads of state, he has treacherously betrayed your mission and given up your city of Rome—and I mean “your city”—because of a few tears from his wife and mother. He has broken his sworn oath like a rotten braid of silk, never following the advice of his fellow officers, but at his mother’s tears he cried and gave away your victory. The young attendants blushed and the courageous men looked at each other and wondered what to think."
"Hear’st thou, Mars?","Do you hear this, Mars?"
"Name not the god, thou boy of tears!","Don’t invoke the god of war, you boy of tears!"
Ha!,Ha!
No more.,No more.
"Measureless liar, thou hast made my heart Too great for what contains it. Boy! O slave! Pardon me, lords, ’tis the first time that ever I was forced to scold. Your judgments, my grave lords, Who wears my stripes impress’d upon him; that Must bear my beating to his grave—shall join To thrust the lie unto him.","Incalculable liar, you make my heart swell beyond the bounds of my chest. “Boy”! Oh, slave! Forgive me, lords, this is the first time that I’ve ever been forced to scold. My grave lords, you must judge this lowlife to be the liar. Even his own version of events—he who has scars from my sword on his body and must carry the mark of my victory to his grave—will confirm that he’s the liar."
"Peace, both, and hear me speak.","That’s enough, both of you. Hear me speak."
"Stain all your edges on me. Boy! false hound! If you have writ your annals true, ’tis there, That, like an eagle in a dove-cote, I Flutter’d your Volscians in Corioli:","Cut me to pieces, Volsces. Men and lads, stain your swords with my blood. “Boy”! Miserable liar! If you’ve written your histories accurately, it’s recorded there that like a wolf in a hen house, I destroyed your Volscians in Corioli. I did it alone. “Boy”!"
"Why, noble lords, Will you be put in mind of his blind fortune, Which was your shame, by this unholy braggart, ’Fore your own eyes and ears?","Noble lords, remember that it was simply good luck that allowed this prideful sinner to cause you this shame, he who now stands before your own eyes and ears."
Let him die for’t.,Let him die for it.
‘Tear him to pieces.’ ‘Do it presently.’ ‘He kill’d my son.’ ‘My daughter.’ ‘He killed my cousin Marcus.’ ‘He killed my father.’,Tear him to pieces! Do it now! He killed my son! My daughter! He killed my cousin Marcus! He killed my father!
"Peace, ho! no outrage: peace! This orb o’ the earth. His last offences to us Shall have judicious hearing. Stand, Aufidius, And trouble not the peace.","Peace! Stop! No outrage. Peace! The man is noble and his fame is known around the world. We will review his most recent offenses fairly in the court of law. Stop, Aufidius, don’t disturb the peace."
"O that I had him, To use my lawful sword!","(drawing his sword) Oh, I wish I could lawfully kill him and his whole family with my sword."
Insolent villain!,Contemptuous villain!
"Kill, kill, kill, kill, kill him!","Kill, kill, kill, kill, kill him!"
"Hold, hold, hold, hold!","Wait, wait, wait, wait!"
"My noble masters, hear me speak.","My noble masters, hear me speak."
"O Tullus,—","Oh, Tullus—"
Thou hast done a deed whereat valour will weep.,You’ve done a dishonorable deed.
"Tread not upon him. Masters all, be quiet; Put up your swords.","Don’t stand on him. Noble ones, be quiet. Put away your swords."
"Provoked by him, you cannot—the great danger Which this man’s life did owe you, you’ll rejoice That he is thus cut off. Please it your honours To call me to your senate, I’ll deliver Your heaviest censure.","My lords, when you understand—because in this rage he provoked, you cannot—the great danger this man intended to put you in, you’ll rejoice that he has been stopped. If your honors will please call me to your Senate, I’ll prove myself to have been your loyal servant or endure your strictest punishment."
Bear from hence his body; And mourn you for him: let him be regarded As the most noble corse that ever herald,Step away from his body and mourn for him. Let him be considered as the most noble corpse that a procession has ever followed to a grave.
His own impatience Takes from Aufidius a great part of blame. Let’s make the best of it.,His own fury frees Aufidius from most of the blame. Let’s make the best of it.
"My rage is gone; Help, three o’ the chiefest soldiers; I’ll be one. Beat thou the drum, that it speak mournfully: Trail your steel pikes. Though in this city he Hath widow’d and unchilded many a one, Yet he shall have a noble memory. Assist.","My rage is gone, and I’m full of sorrow. Lift him up. Help, three of the best soldiers. I’ll be the fourth. Play the drum in a mournful beat. Lay down your steel spears. Even though he has killed the husbands and children of many people in this city and they’re still mourning their loss, we’ll give him a noble memorial. Help me."
