"Proceed, Solinus, to procure my fall, And by the doom of death end woes and all.","Continue, Solinus, and bring on my downfall. Give me the death sentence and end all my troubles."
"Merchant of Syracuse, plead no more. I am not partial to infringe our laws. Sprung from the rancorous outrage of your duke To merchants, our well-dealing countrymen, Who, wanting guilders to redeem their lives, Have seal’d his rigorous statutes with their bloods, For, since the mortal and intestine jars 'Twixt thy seditious countrymen and us, It hath in solemn synods been decreed Both by the Syracusians and ourselves, Nay, more, if any born at Ephesus Be seen at any Syracusian marts and fairs; Again, if any Syracusian born Come to the bay of Ephesus, he dies, Unless a thousand marks be levièd To quit the penalty and to ransom him. Thy substance, valued at the highest rate, Cannot amount unto a hundred marks;","Merchant of Syracuse, stop your begging: I’m not inclined to bend our laws. The hatred and discord between our two cities is the result of the bitter offenses your duke has perpetrated against the merchants of Ephesus, our well-behaved countrymen. Lacking the money to ransom themselves, these merchants were executed under your duke’s harsh laws, and this has erased all looks of pity from my face. Ever since these deadly conflicts erupted between your violent countrymen and ours, both you Syracusians and we Ephesians have held serious councils and decided not to permit any travel between our two hostile towns. No–the law goes further: if anyone born in Ephesus is seen in Syracuse’s marketplaces or if anyone born in Syracuse comes to Ephesus, that man dies, and his possessions will be confiscated by the Duke, unless he can raise a thousand marks to pay the penalty and ransom himself. Your possessions, even if we calculate their worth very generously, don’t even add up to a hundred marks. Therefore, by law, you are condemned to die."
"Yet this my comfort: when your words are done, My woes end likewise with the evening sun.","At least I have this comfort: when you finish speaking, my troubles will also end, at sundown."
"Well, Syracusian, say in brief the cause Why thou dep-artedst from thy native home","Well, Syracusian, tell us–briefly–why you left your hometown and came to Ephesus."
"A heavier task could not have been imposed Than I to speak my griefs unspeakable; Yet, that the world may witness that my end Was wrought by nature, not by vile offense, In Syracusa was I born, and wed Unto a woman happy but for me, And by me, had not our hap been bad. With her I lived in joy. Our wealth increased To Epidamnum, till my factor’s death And the great care of goods at random left Drew me from kind embracements of my spouse; From whom my absence was not six months old The pleasing punishment that women bear– Had made provision for her following me And soon and safe arrivèd where I was. There had she not been long but she became And, which was strange, the one so like the other As could not be distinguished but by names. That very hour, and in the selfsame inn, A meaner woman was deliverèd Those, for their parents were exceeding poor, I bought and brought up to attend my sons. My wife, not meanly proud of two such boys, Made daily motions for our home return. We came aboard.","Asking me to speak of my unspeakable griefs–that’s the hardest task you could impose on me. But I’ll do it so that the world can see that it was natural emotion, and not a desire to break the law, that brought me to this fate. I’ll tell you whatever my sorrow permits me to say. I was born in Syracuse, and I married a woman–a fortunate woman, except for having been married to me. And yet I would have made her happy had our luck not been so bad. I lived with her in joy, and our wealth increased from the prosperous journeys I frequently made to Epidamnum. Then my agent died and, obligated to care for my now untended goods abroad, I was drawn away from my wife’s fond embraces. I hadn’t been gone for six months when my wife, almost fainting with the pains of pregnancy, made arrangements to follow me, and she soon arrived safely where I was. She hadn’t been there very long before she became the joyful mother of twin boys. It was strange: they looked so much alike that the only way to tell them apart was by their names. In the same hour, and in the same inn, a poor woman also delivered identical twin boys. Their parents had very little, so I bought the boys and raised them as companions and servants for our twin sons. My wife was more than a little proud of our two boys, and every day she would press me to return home. Reluctantly, I agreed–alas! Too quickly, we boarded a ship."
"A league from Epidamnum had we sailed Before the always-wind-obeying deep Gave any tragic instance of our harm; For what obscured light the heavens did grant Did but convey unto our fearful minds A doubtful warrant of immediate death, Which though myself would gladly have embraced, Weeping before for what she saw must come, And piteous plainings of the pretty babes, That mourned for fashion, ignorant what to fear, Forced me to seek delays for them and me. The sailors sought for safety by our boat And left the ship, then sinking-ripe, to us. My wife, more careful for the latter-born, Had fastened him unto a small spare mast, To him one of the other twins was bound, Whilst I had been like heedful of the other. The children thus disposed, my wife and I, Fixing our eyes on whom our care was fixed, And, floating straight, obedient to the stream, Was carried towards Corinth, as we thought. At length the sun, gazing upon the earth, Dispersed those vapors that offended us, The seas waxed calm, and we discoverèd Two ships from far, making amain to us, Of Corinth that, of Epidaurus this. But ere they came,–O, let me say no more!","We had sailed a league league = about three miles league away from Epidamnum before the sea, which always obeys the winds' commands, gave any indication of danger. We didn’t stay hopeful much longer: soon, the sky grew so dark that we were convinced we were going to die immediately. I could have accepted that, but I was forced by my wife’s incessant weeping–she wept in advance for the things that she saw ahead–and the piteous complaints of the sweet infants–who cried in imitation of the adults, without understanding why–to find a way to save us. Here’s the best I could do: the crew of our ship had fled for safety in the lifeboats and left us to sink with the ship. My wife, who was very concerned about the younger of our twins, tied him to a spare mast–the kind that sailors use for just such a purpose. She tied one of the other twins to him. I did the same with the remaining two boys. With the children taken care of, my wife and I tied ourselves to opposite ends of the mast and floated off, obedient to the current. It carried us toward Corinth–or so we thought. Eventually the sun, looking down upon the earth, burned off the threatening storm clouds. By the power of the sun’s wished-for light, the seas became calm. We saw two ships sailing toward us, one from Corinth, the other from Epidaurus. But before they reached us–let me say no more! You’ll have to imagine what came next, based on what had already happened."
"Nay, forward, old man. Do not break off so, For we may pity though not pardon thee.","No, keep going, old man; don’t stop like that. For we may take pity on you, even if we can’t pardon you."
"O, had the gods done so, I had not now Worthily termed them merciless to us. We were encounterd by a mighty rock, Which being violently borne upon, Our helpful ship was splitted in the midst; So that, in this unjust divorce of us, What to delight in, what to sorrow for. Her part, poor soul, seeming as burdenèd With lesser weight, but not with lesser woe, Was carried with more speed before the wind, By fishermen of Corinth, as we thought. At length, another ship had seized on us And, knowing whom it was their hap to save, Gave healthful welcome to their shipwracked guests, Had not their bark been very slow of sail; And therefore homeward did they bend their course. Thus have you heard me severed from my bliss; That by misfortunes was my life prolonged","Had the gods taken pity on us, I wouldn’t be here calling them merciless. The two ships hadn’t come within ten leagues of us when our ship hit a huge rock and split down the middle. As we were unjustly separated from each other, both my wife and I were left with something to delight in and something to sorrow over. For her part–the poor soul! Her half of the mast weighed less, but she was no luckier than I was: the wind carried her away more quickly. I saw them rescued by fishermen from Corinth–or so I thought. After a while, another ship rescued me and the two boys who were with me. The sailors knew me, so they took good care of us. Our ship would have caught up with the other ship and taken back my wife and the children, but we sailed too slowly and their ship sped toward their home. So now you’ve heard how I was separated from everything I love. It’s been my bad luck to remain alive long enough to be able to tell the sad stories of my own misfortunes."
"And for the sake of them thou sorrowest for, Do me the favour to dilate at full What hath befall'n of them and thee till now.","And for the sake of those you grieve for, do me a favor: tell me the full story of what has happened to you and them, up to this point."
"My youngest boy, and yet my eldest care, After his brother, and importuned me That his attendant–so his case was like,","My youngest son, whom I care about the most, turned eighteen and started to wonder about his twin brother. He asked me to let him take his attendant–who had also lost a brother, though he had kept his brother’s"
"Reft of his brother, but retained his name– Might bear him company in the quest of him, I hazarded the loss of whom I loved. Five summers have I spent in farthest Greece, Roaming clean through the bounds of Asia, And, coasting homeward, came to Ephesus, Or that or any place that harbors men. But here must end the story of my life; And happy were I in my timely death Could all my travels warrant me they live.","name for himself–and go in search of him. I wanted to see my lost son as well, so I risked losing the one I loved in order to find the other. I’ve spent five years in the remotest parts of Greece and roaming all over Asia. On my way home, I came to Ephesus. I have no hope of finding my boys here, but I will check every place that is inhabited by men. But that is where the story of my life must end. I’d be happy to die if, in all my travels, I could prove that they are alive."
"To bear the extremity of dire mishap, Now, trust me, were it not against our laws, Against my crown, my oath, my dignity, Which princes, would they, may not disannul, But though thou art adjudgèd to the death, And passèd sentence may not be recalled But to our honour’s great disparagement, Yet will I favor thee in what I can. To seek thy life by beneficial help. Try all the friends thou hast in Ephesus; Beg thou, or borrow, to make up the sum, And live. If no, then thou art doom’d to die.–","Poor Egeon! Fate has decreed that you must endure the extremes of terrible misfortune. Believe me, if it weren’t against the law, my crown, my duty, and my position (which princes cannot disobey, not matter how they feel), my very soul would argue your case. But you are sentenced to death, and changing a sentence that’s already been passed would dishonor my title. However, I’ll do what I can for you. I will allow you one day to look for help in Ephesus. Call any friends you have. Beg or borrow to come up with the ransom. If you can, you live. If not, you are doomed to die. Jailer, take him into custody."
"I will, my lord.",I will.
"Hopeless and helpless doth Egeon wend, But to procrastinate his lifeless end.","Hopeless and helpless, I go my way, merely putting off my fatal end."
"Therefore give out you are of Epidamnum, Lest that your goods too soon be confiscate. This very day a Syracusian merchant Is apprehended for arrival here According to the statute of the town Dies ere the weary sun set in the west. There is your money that I had to keep.","So, tell people that you’re from Epidamnum–otherwise all your goods will be confiscated. Just today, a merchant from Syracuse was arrested for coming here. He couldn’t afford the ransom, so by law, he’ll be put to death before the sun sets. Here’s the money you asked me to hold."
"Go bear it to the Centaur, where we host, Within this hour it will be dinnertime. Till that, I’ll view the manners of the town, Peruse the traders, gaze upon the buildings, And then return and sleep within mine inn, Get thee away.","Dromio, bring this money to the Centaur Inn, where we’re lodging, and wait there until I come. It’ll be lunchtime within an hour. Until then, I’ll walk around town, peruse the markets, and gaze upon the buildings, and then I’ll return and sleep at the inn. I’m stiff and weary from all this travel. Get going now."
"Many a man would take you at your word And go indeed, having so good a mean.",Many men would take you literally and take off with all this money.
"A trusty villain, sir, that very oft, Lightens my humor with his merry jests. What, will you walk with me about the town And then go to my inn and dine with me?","He’s a trustworthy servant. Often, when I’m dulled by worry and melancholy, he lightens my mood with his merry pranks. Listen, will you walk with me around the town and then dine with me at the inn?"
"I am invited, sir, to certain merchants,","Begging your pardon, but I’ve been invited to see some merchants, who I’m hoping to see a profit from. But if"
"I crave your pardon. Soon at five o'clock, Please you, I’ll meet with you upon the mart And afterward consort you till bedtime. My present business calls me from you now.","it pleases you, I’ll meet you in the marketplace at five and will keep you company until bedtime. Right now, my pressing business calls me away."
And wander up and down to view the city.,"Farewell till then. I will go lose myself, wandering up and down throughout the city."
"Sir, I commend you to your own content.","Sir, I leave you to your own contentment."
"He that commends me to mine own content Commends me to the thing I cannot get. That in the ocean seeks another drop, Who, falling there to find his fellow forth, Unseen, inquisitive, confounds himself. So I, to find a mother and a brother,","He leaves me to my own contentment, but that’s the one thing I cannot find. Out in the world, I’m like a drop of water, trying to find a drop that matches in the whole wide ocean. When that drop fails its task–unnoticed, inquisitive–it dissipates into the ocean and destroys itself. In order to find a mother and a brother, I too have lost myself, unhappily."
Here comes the almanac of my true date.— What now? How chance thou art returned so soon?,Here comes the man who shares my birthday. What is it? How is it that you’ve come back so soon?
Returned so soon? Rather approach’d too late! The capon burns; the pig falls from the spit; My mistress made it one upon my cheek. She is so hot because the meat is cold; The meat is cold because you come not home; You come not home because you have no stomach; But we that know what ’tis to fast and pray Are penitent for your default today.,"Back so soon? Too late is more like it. The chicken is burning, the pig is overcooked, the clock has already struck twelve, and my mistress has clocked me one on the cheek. She’s hot because lunch is cold; lunch is cold because you’re not home; you’re not home because you’re not hungry; you’re not hungry because you’ve eaten already. But we servants—who know how to properly fast and pray—are being punished for your offenses today."
"Stop in your wind, sir. Tell me this, I pray: Where have you left the money that I gave you?","Hold on a second. Answer me this, please: where’s the money I gave you?"
"To pay the saddler for my mistress' crupper? The saddler had it, sir; I kept it not.","Oh, the sixpence you gave me last Wednesday to buy leather goods for my mistress? The saddle maker has it, sir—I didn’t keep it."
"I am not in a sportive humor now. Tell me, and dally not: where is the money? So great a charge from thine own custody?",I’m not in a joking mood. Tell me right now and stop fooling: where’s the money? We’re strangers here. How dare you let such a large amount escape your keeping?
"I pray you, jest, sir, as you sit at dinner. I from my mistress come to you in post; If I return, I shall be post indeed, Methinks your maw, like mine, should be your clock, And strike you home without a messenger.","Please, sir; crack jokes over lunch. My mistress made me hurry here. If I go back without you, she’ll punish your faults by breaking my head open. I should think that your appetite would act like a clock (as mine does) and bring you home on its own, without the need for a messenger."
"Come, Dromio, come, these jests are out of season. Reserve them till a merrier hour than this.","That’s enough, Dromio, please. This isn’t a good moment for jokes—save them till a happier time. Where’s the gold I gave you?"
"To me, sir? Why, you gave no gold to me!","Gave me, sir? You didn’t give me any gold."
"Come on, sir knave, have done your foolishness, And tell me how thou hast disposed thy charge.","Come on, you rogue. Quit joking. Tell me what you’ve done with the money I entrusted to you."
My charge was but to fetch you from the mart My mistress and her sister stays for you.,"The only thing that I’ve been entrusted with was getting you from the market and bringing you to your house, the Phoenix, for lunch. My mistress and her sister are waiting for you."
"Now, as I am a Christian, answer me In what safe place you have bestowed my money, Or I shall break that merry sconce of yours Where is the thousand marks thou hadst of me?","Tell me where you’ve stowed away my money, or I swear I’ll break that comical head of yours for goofing when I’m not in the mood. Where are the thousand marks marks = units of currency marks you had from me?"
"I have some marks of yours upon my pate, Some of my mistress' marks upon my shoulders, But not a thousand marks between you both. Perchance you will not bear them patiently.","I have some marks from you on my head and some of my mistress’s marks on my body. But between the both of you, I don’t have a thousand marks. If I gave those marks back to you, chances are you wouldn’t take them as patiently as I did."
"Thy mistress' marks? what mistress, slave, hast thou?",Your mistress’s marks? What mistress do you have?
"Your worship’s wife, my mistress at the Phoenix, She that doth fast till you come home to dinner","Your wife, sir. My mistress. At the Phoenix. The one who’s waiting for you to come home for lunch and praying that you’ll get home quickly."
"What, wilt thou flout me thus unto my face, Being forbid? There, take you that, sir knave. (beats DROMIO OF EPHESUS)","What, are you going to mock me to my face when I told you not to? There, take that, you scoundrel! (beats DROMIO OF EPHESUS)"
"What mean you, sir? For God’s sake, hold your hands. Nay, an you will not, sir, I’ll take my heels.","What are you doing? Stop, for God’s sake! Well, if you don’t, then I’m out of here."
"The villain is o'erraught of all my money. They say this town is full of cozenage, As nimble jugglers that deceive the eye, Dark-working sorcerers that change the mind, Disguised cheaters, prating mountebanks, And many suchlike liberties of sin. If it prove so, I will be gone the sooner. I’ll to the Centaur to go seek this slave.","I swear, somehow the fool has been cheated out of all my money. They say that this town is full of deception—illusionists that can fool the eye, dark sorcerers who can bewitch your mind, soul-killing witches who can disfigure your body, disguised swindlers, fast-talking fakers, and all kinds of other unchecked sins. If this is true, then I’ll be leaving all the sooner. I’ll go to the Centaur to find this servant of mine—I fear that my money isn’t safe."
"Neither my husband nor the slave returned That in such haste I sent to seek his master? Sure, Luciana, it is two o'clock.","Neither my husband nor the slave has returned, even though I sent the slave off running. Surely, Luciana, it’s already two o'clock."
"Perhaps some merchant hath invited him, Good sister, let us dine and never fret. A man is master of his liberty; Time is their master, and when they see time They’ll go or come. If so, be patient, sister.","Maybe some merchant at the marketplace invited him home for lunch. Sister, let’s eat and stop worrying. A man is master of his own freedom: time is his only master, and when the right moment comes along, he’ll come or go as he pleases. If this is so, be patient, sister."
Why should their liberty than ours be more?,Why should men be more free than women?
Because their business still lies out o' door.,Because their business lies outside the home.
"Look when I serve him so, he takes it ill.","Listen, when I behave this way toward him, he hates it."
"O, know he is the bridle of your will.","Oh, you should know that he’s the bridle bridle = muzzlelike device used to restrain a horse bridle to your will."
There’s none but asses will be bridled so.,Only a mule would agree to that.
"There’s nothing situate under heaven’s eye But hath his bound, in earth, in sea, in sky. The beasts, the fishes, and the wingèd fowls Are their males' subjects and at their controls.","Why, too much freedom leads to woe. There’s nothing under heaven that doesn’t have its limits. The beasts on the earth, the fish in the sea, and the birds in the sky are all subject to the males of their species and under their control. Men, who are nearest to God, are the masters of all these creatures. And men—the lords of the wide"
"Lord of the wide world and wild wat'ry seas, Endued with intellectual sense and souls, Of more preeminence than fish and fowls, Are masters to their females, and their lords.","world and the wild watery seas, gifted with intellectual sense and souls, greater than the fish and the birds—are the masters of women and their lords. Therefore, you should obey their wishes."
This servitude makes you to keep unwed.,It’s this servantlike mentality that’s keeping you unmarried.
"Not this, but troubles of the marriage bed.","No, that’s not it—it’s because of what happens in the marriage bed."
"But, were you wedded, you would bear some sway.","But if you were married, you’d wield some influence."
"Ere I learn love, I’ll practice to obey.","Before I learn how to love, I’ll learn how to follow orders."
How if your husband start some otherwhere?,What if your husband strays elsewhere?
"Till he come home again, I would forbear.",I’d endure it until he came home again.
"Patience unmoved! No marvel though she pause; They can be meek that have no other cause. A wretched soul, bruised with adversity But were we burdened with like weight of pain, As much or more we should ourselves complain. So thou, that hast no unkind mate to grieve thee, With urging helpless patience would relieve me; This fool-begged patience in thee will be left.","Now that’s patience! No wonder she’s waiting to get married. It’s easy to preach meekness when you have no reason to act otherwise. When we’re faced with a wretched person, bruised and crying with hardship, we try to get them to shush up. And yet, if we were suffering the same kind of pain, we’d complain just as much—if not more! So you, who have no husband causing you problems, want to comfort me by preaching the virtue of feeble patience. But if you live to see yourself similarly denied your rights, this foolish patience will abandon you."
"Well, I will marry one day, but to try. Here comes your man. Now is your husband nigh.","Well, I’ll get married one day, just to see. Here comes your servant—your husband must be coming soon."
"Say, is your tardy master now at hand?","Tell me, is your tardy master close at hand?"
"Nay, he’s at two hands with me, and that my two ears can witness.","No; but he came at me with two hands—just ask my ears i.e., “He beat me on my ears.” ears ."
"Say, didst thou speak with him? Know’st thou his mind?",Did you talk to him? Do you know his plans?
"Ay, ay, he told his mind upon mine ear. Beshrew his hand, I scarce could understand it.","Yes, yes, he told me his plans on my ears. Damn his hands—I could barely understand Dromio puns on “understand,” using the word to mean “stand up under the force of the beating.” understand it."
Spake he so doubtfully thou couldst not feel his meaning?,Did he speak so ambiguously that you couldn’t get a feeling for what he meant?
"Nay, he struck so plainly I could too well feel his blows, and withal so doubtfully that I could scarce understand them.","No; he hit me very clearly and I felt his punches perfectly well. They were so dreadful, I could barely stand up under them."
"But say, I prithee, is he coming home? It seems he hath great care to please his wife.","But please, tell me: is he coming home? It seems he has taken great care to please his wife."
"Why, mistress, sure my master is horn mad.","Why, mistress, my master is as angry as a bull with horns."
"Horn mad, thou villain!",Horns? You bastard!
"I mean not cuckold mad, But sure he is stark mad. When I desired him to come home to dinner, He asked me for a thousand marks in gold.","I don’t mean he’s cuckold cuckold = a man whose wife cheated on him; cuckolds were commonly depicted wearing horns cuckold mad. But he sure is angry. When I asked him to come home to lunch, he asked me for a thousand marks. “It’s lunchtime,” I said. “My gold,” he said. “The meat’s burning,” I said. “My gold,” he said. “Will you come home?” I said."
"“Your meat doth burn,” quoth I. “My gold,” quoth he. “Will you come?” quoth I. “My gold,” quoth he. “Where is the thousand marks I gave thee, villain?” “The pig,” quoth I, “is burned.” “My gold,” quoth he. I know not thy mistress. Out on thy mistress!”","“My gold,” he said. “Where’s the thousand marks I gave you, scoundrel?” “The pig,” I said, “is burned.” “My gold,” he said. “My mistress,” I said. “Damn your mistress! I don’t know your mistress, the hell with your mistress!”"
Quoth who?,Who said that?
"Quoth my master. “I know,” quoth he, “no house, no wife, no mistress.” I thank him, I bare home upon my shoulders, For, in conclusion, he did beat me there.","My master said it. “I don’t know,” he said, “any house, wife, or mistress.” My message, which was supposed to be delivered with my mouth, ended up being carried back home by my shoulders. Because at the end of it all, that’s where he beat me."
"Go back again, thou slave, and fetch him home.","Go back again, slave, and bring him home."
Go back again and be new beaten home?,"Go back again, to be beaten home again? For God’s sake, send somebody else."
"Back, slave, or I will break thy pate across.","Go back, slave, or I’ll knock you one across the head."
"And he will bless that cross with other beating. Between you, I shall have a holy head.","And he’ll add another knock across. With all these crosses, I’ll have a holy head."
"Hence, prating peasant! Fetch thy master home.","Get out of here, you blathering peasant! Bring your master home."
"That like a football you do spurn me thus? You spurn me hence, and he will spurn me hither. If I last in this service, you must case me in leather.","Do I treat you this roundly? You’re kicking me around like I’m a football. You kick me out, he kicks me back. If I keep working for you, I’m going to end up wrapped in leather, like a football."
"Fie, how impatience loureth in your face.",Look at you! You have impatience all over your face.
"Whilst I at home starve for a merry look. Hath homely age th' alluring beauty took From my poor cheek? Then he hath wasted it. Are my discourses dull? Barren my wit? Unkindness blunts it more than marble hard. Do their gay vestments his affections bait? That’s not my fault; he’s master of my state. What ruins are in me that can be found Of my defeatures. My decayèd fair A sunny look of his would soon repair. But, too unruly deer, he breaks the pale And feeds from home. Poor I am but his stale.","He feels the need to grace all his other tramps with his presence while I sit at home starving for a smile from him. Has homely old age taken the alluring beauty from my poor cheeks? That’s because he has squandered my beauty. Am I boring? Have I lost my wit? If my conversation is no longer free and clever, that’s because he’s dulled it—I’m like a sharp tool he’s blunted with a hard piece of marble. Is he charmed by their pretty clothes? Well, that’s not my fault—he’s the one in charge of my spending. What faults can you find in me that weren’t first caused by him? One smile from him would repair my decayed beauty. But like an unruly deer, he’s always trespassing past the park borders and straying away from home to feed in new pastures. I am nothing but a poor, used fool."
"Self-harming jealousy, fie, beat it hence.",This jealousy is harming only you! Drive it out of you.
"Unfeeling fools can with such wrongs dispense. I know his eye doth homage otherwhere, Or else what lets it but he would be here? Sister, you know he promised me a chain. So he would keep fair quarter with his bed. I see the jewel best enamelèd Will lose his beauty. Yet the gold bides still That others touch, and often touching will By falsehood and corruption doth it shame. Since that my beauty cannot please his eye, I’ll weep what’s left away, and weeping die.","Only someone who doesn’t feel this pain could tell me to ignore it. I know his eyes are worshiping some other woman, or why wouldn’t he be here? Sister, you know he promised to give me a necklace. I would gladly do without that if he would only stay faithful to me. Even the best jewel can be tarnished. Gold, however, can’t be corrupted—though it can be worn down if it’s touched too often. And no man with a reputation will tarnish that name with lies and bad behavior. Since my beauty no longer pleases my husband, I’ll weep away what’s left and then die with weeping."
How many fond fools serve mad jealousy!,How many infatuated people go mad with jealousy!
"The gold I gave to Dromio is laid up Safe at the Centaur, and the heedful slave Is wandered forth, in care to seek me out. By computation and mine host’s report, I sent him from the mart. See, here he comes.","The gold I gave Dromio is safe and sound at the Centaur, and the inn host says that Dromio has left and is looking for me. I haven’t spoken to him since I sent him away from the marketplace earlier. Here he comes."
"How now, sir? is your merry humor altered? As you love strokes, so jest with me again. You know no Centaur? You received no gold? My house was at the Phoenix? Wast thou mad, That thus so madly thou didst answer me?","So, sir. Are you over your ridiculous mood? If you like being hit, crack some more jokes. You never heard of the Centaur? You weren’t given any gold? Your mistress sent for me to come to dinner? The Phoenix is my house? Were you mad when you spoke to me so madly?"
"What answer, sir? When spake I such a word?","Said what, sir? When did I say all that?"
"Even now, even here, not half an hour since.",Just now. Right here. Less than half an hour ago.
Home to the Centaur with the gold you gave me.,I haven’t seen you since you sent me to the Centaur with the gold you gave me.
"Villain, thou didst deny the gold’s receipt And told’st me of a mistress and a dinner, For which, I hope, thou felt’st I was displeased.","You moron, you denied having any gold, and you told me about a mistress and a lunch. And I hope you realized I wasn’t very happy about it."
"What means this jest? I pray you, master, tell me?","I’m glad to see you in such a merry mood. But what’s the joke? Please, master, tell me."
"Yea, dost thou jeer and flout me in the teeth? Think’st thou I jest? Hold, take thou that and that. (beats DROMIO OF SYRACUSE)","What, are you mocking me to my face? You think I’m joking? Here. Take that, and that! (beats DROMIO OF SYRACUSE)"
"Hold, sir, for God’s sake! Now your jest is earnest.","Stop, sir, for God’s sake! Now this joke has turned serious. Why are you doing this?"
"Because that I familiarly sometimes Do use you for my fool and chat with you, Your sauciness will jest upon my love And make a common of my serious hours. But creep in crannies when he hides his beams. If you will jest with me, know my aspect, And fashion your demeanor to my looks, Or I will beat this method in your sconce.","Just because I act familiar with you sometimes and let you fool around and joke with me, you try to take advantage of my affection. You pull pranks when I’m in a serious mood. You know, foolish gnats come out in the sunshine, but they creep back into their holes when it’s dark. If you want to crack jokes, first check what kind of mood I’m in and then adjust your behavior to suit me. If you don’t learn this rule, I’ll have to beat it into your sconce."
"“Sconce” call you it? So you would leave battering, I had rather have it a “head.” An you use these blows long, I must get a sconce for my head and ensconce it too, or else I shall seek my wit in my shoulders. But I pray, sir, why am I beaten?","You call it my “ sconce Dromio puns on various meanings of “sconce,”including “head,” “fortress” (which Dromio imagines being attacked with a battering ram), and “curtain.” sconce ”? I’d rather call it my “head” so you’d stop battering it. If you keep pounding me, I’ll need a sconce to wrap my head with, or else I’ll have to keep my brain in my chest. But sir, why are you beating me?"
Dost thou not know?,Don’t you know?
"Nothing, sir, but that I am beaten.",All I know is that I’m being beaten.
Shall I tell you why?,Should I tell you why?
"Ay, sir, and wherefore, for they say every why hath a wherefore.","Yes, and wherefore. You know the old saying: “Every ‘why’ has a ‘wherefore.’”"
“Why” first: for flouting me; and then “wherefore”: for urging it the second time to me.,“Why” first: for defying me. And then “wherefore”: for doing it a second time.
"Was there ever any man thus beaten out of season, When in the “why” and the “wherefore” is neither rhyme nor reason? Well, sir, I thank you.","I don’t think any man’s ever been beaten for a “why” and “wherefore” that made so little sense. Well, thank you."
"Thank me, sir, for what?",Thank me? For what?
"Marry, sir, for this something that you gave me for nothing.",Because you gave me something for nothing.
"I’ll make you amends next, to give you nothing for something. But say, sir, is it dinnertime?",Next time I’ll give you nothing for something. Is it lunchtime?
"No, sir, I think the meat wants that I have.",No. The meat lacks something that I have.
"In good time, sir, what’s that?",What would that be?
Basting.,A basting.
"Well, sir, then ’twill be dry.","Well, then it will be dry."
"If it be, sir, I pray you, eat none of it.","If it is, I suggest you don’t eat it."
Your reason?,Why not?
Lest it make you choleric and purchase me another dry basting.,"Because it will make you angry, and that will get me another beating."
"Well, sir, learn to jest in good time. There’s a time for all things.","Well, learn to make jokes at the appropriate time. There’s a time for all things."
I durst have denied that before you were so choleric.,"Before you got so angry, I never would have thought that."
"By what rule, sir?",Why not?
"Marry, sir, by a rule as plain as the plain bald pate of Father Time himself.",I’ll tell you: it’s because of a law as plain as Father Time’s bald head.
Let’s hear it.,Let’s hear it.
There’s no time for a man to recover his hair that grows bald by nature.,"There may be a time for everything, but no man who has gone bald naturally can get his hair back."
May he not do it by fine and recovery?,Can’t he get it by fine and recovery Fine and recovery = a legal term related to claiming ownership of private property fine and recovery ?
"Yes, to pay a fine for a periwig, and recover the lost hair of another man.","Yes, he can pay a fine for a wig and then recover another man’s lost hair."
"Why is Time such a niggard of hair, being, as it is, so plentiful an excrement?","Why is Time so cheap about giving out hair? After all, it’s plentiful in its growth."
"Because it is a blessing that he bestows on beasts, and what he hath scanted men in hair, he hath given them in wit.","Because animals are blessed with hair. With men, he’s been stingy with hair, but he makes up for it by giving them intelligence."
"Why, but there’s many a man hath more hair than wit.",But a lot of men have more hair than intelligence.
Not a man of those but he hath the wit to lose his hair.,And not one of them is smart enough to stop himself from going bald.
"Why, thou didst conclude hairy men plain dealers without wit.","So then, you must think that hairy men are honest and simpleminded."
"The plainer dealer, the sooner lost. Yet he loseth it in a kind of jollity.","The more simpleminded they are, the sooner they lose their hair In the original Shakespearean line, there are a series of sexual puns and jokes about venereal diseases-venereal disease can cause hair loss; “sound” can mean “healthy,” “thing” can refer to a sexual organ, and “falsing” means “deceptive.” lose their hair . But they have a good time doing so."
For what reason?,Why?
"For two, and sound ones too.","Two reasons. And good ones, too."
"Nay, not sound, I pray you.","Not good ones, please."
"Sure ones, then.",Then sure ones.
"Nay, not sure, in a thing falsing.","No, not sure ones when we’re talking about something unsure."
"Certain ones, then.",Then certain ones.
Name them.,Name them.
"The one, to save the money that he spends in tiring; the other, that at dinner they should not drop in his porridge.","One, so they can save the money they spent on hairstyling, and two, so that when their hair falls out it doesn’t land in their dinner."
You would all this time have proved there is no time for all things.,You were supposed to be proving that there isn’t time for everything.
"Marry, and did, sir: namely, e'en no time to recover hair lost by nature.","Right, and I did, sir. There’s no time to get back hair that’s fallen out."
But your reason was not substantial why there is no time to recover.,You didn’t come up with a very good proof.
"Thus I mend it: Time himself is bald and therefore, to the world’s end, will have bald followers.","Then I’ll change it to this: Father Time himself is bald, so for all time there will be bald men."
"I knew ’twould be a bald conclusion: But soft, who wafts us yonder?",I knew you’d come up with a bald “Bald” can also mean “trivial” or “lame.” bald conclusion. But wait—who’s that waving to us?
"Ay, ay, Antipholus, look strange and frown. Some other mistress hath thy sweet aspects. The time was once when thou unurged wouldst vow That never words were music to thine ear, That never object pleasing in thine eye, That never touch well welcome to thy hand, Unless I spake, or looked, or touched, or carved to thee. How comes it now, my husband, O, how comes it That thou art thus estranged from thyself? “Thyself” I call it, being strange to me, Am better than thy dear self’s better part. Ah, do not tear away thyself from me! For know, my love, as easy mayest thou fall A drop of water in the breaking gulf, Without addition or diminishing, As take from me thyself and not me too. How dearly would it touch thee to the quick, Shouldst thou but hear I were licentious","Yes, yes, Antipholus: look bewildered and frown at me. You’ve given away all your sweet looks to some other woman—I am not Adriana nor your wife. There was a time when you’d freely tell me that words were never music to your ear unless I said them, that objects never pleased your eye unless I showed them to you, that touches never pleased your hands unless they were my touches, and that food never tasted sweet to you unless I had prepared it. How is it, my husband—oh, how is it—that you have become a stranger to yourself? I say yourself because you are a stranger to me now, but when we are indivisible and united in one body, I am better than the best part of you. Ah, don’t tear yourself away from me! For you should know, my love, that it would be as easy to let a drop of water fall into the churning sea and then fish it out again, unmingled and undiminished, as it would be to take yourself from me without taking me out of myself as well. How deeply would it cut you if you heard that I had been cheating on you and that my body—which is sworn for you only—had been contaminated by vile lust?"
"By ruffian lust should be contaminate! Wouldst thou not spit at me, and spurn at me, And hurl the name of husband in my face, And tear the stained skin off my harlot brow, And break it with a deep-divorcing vow? I know thou canst, and therefore see thou do it. I am possessed with an adulterate blot; My blood is mingled with the crime of lust; I do digest the poison of thy flesh, Being strumpeted by thy contagion. Keep then fair league and truce with thy true bed, I live disstained, thou undishonorèd.","Wouldn’t you spit at me, and spurn me, and throw our marriage vows in my face? Wouldn’t you tear the mark off my whorish forehead Whores were commonly punished by being branded on the forehead. whorish forehead , cut the wedding ring off my finger, and swear to divorce me? I know you would, so go ahead. For I have, in fact, committed adultery, and my blood has been contaminated by lust. Because if marriage has made us one, then when you cheat, you poison my flesh as well—your contagion makes me a prostitute. So stay faithful to me and return to your marriage bed.That way, my reputation will be protected and your honor will be intact."
"In Ephesus I am but two hours old, As strange unto your town as to your talk, Who, every word by all my wit being scanned, Want wit in all one word to understand.","Are you talking to me, fair woman? I don’t know you. I’ve only been in Ephesus for two hours. Your talk is as strange to me as your town. I’m trying with all my wits to figure out what you mean, but I can’t understand a word of it."
When were you wont to use my sister thus? She sent for you by Dromio home to dinner.,"Shame on you, brother-in-law! You’ve changed so much! Why are you treating my sister like this? She sent Dromio to bring you home for lunch."
By Dromio?,Dromio?
By me?,Me?
"That he did buffet thee and, in his blows, Denied my house for his, me for his wife.",You. And this is what you told me he said: that he beat you and pretended his house wasn’t his and I wasn’t his wife.
"Did you converse, sir, with this gentlewoman? What is the course and drift of your compact?",Did you talk with this woman? What kind of scheme do you have going together?
"I, sir? I never saw her till this time.","Me, sir? I never saw her till now."
"Villain, thou liest; for even her very words Didst thou deliver to me on the mart.",You liar! You said those exact things to me back in the marketplace.
I never spake with her in all my life.,I never talked with her in my life.
How can she thus then call us by our names—,Then how does she know our names? By magic?
"How ill agrees it with your gravity To counterfeit thus grossly with your slave, Abetting him to thwart me in my mood. Be it my wrong you are from me exempt, Come, I will fasten on this sleeve of thine. Thou art an elm, my husband, I a vine, Whose weakness, married to thy stronger state, Makes me with thy strength to communicate. Usurping ivy, brier, or idle moss, Who, all for want of pruning, with intrusion Infect thy sap and live on thy confusion.","How distasteful! That a man of your stature would scheme with his servant to upset me like this. It may be my fault that you’ve been avoiding me, but don’t make things worse by treating me with contempt as well. I’ll hang on your sleeve: you’re an elm tree, my husband, and I’m a vine. My weakness is enhanced by your strength, which gives me the strength to say this: the things that take you away from me are worthless—just overgrown weeds in need of a trimming. They get into your system and infect you, feeding off your confusion."
To me she speaks; she moves me for her theme. Or sleep I now and think I hear all this? What error drives our eyes and ears amiss? Until I know this sure uncertainty I’ll entertain the offered fallacy.,"She’s talking to me. She’s talking about me. What, was I married to her in a dream? Or am I asleep now and imagining all this? What is making our eyes and ears act so strangely? Until I know for sure, I’ll humor her."
"Dromio, go bid the servants spread for dinner.","Dromio, tell the servants to prepare for lunch."
"O, for my beads! I cross me for a sinner. This is the fairy land. O spite of spites!","Oh, I wish I had my rosary! I’ll cross myself. This must be some kind of fairyland. Oh, spite of spites! We’re"
"We talk with goblins, owls, and sprites: If we obey them not, this will ensue:","speaking with goblins, owls, and demons. If we don’t obey them, they’ll suck the life out of us or pinch us black and blue."
"Why prat’st thou to thyself and answer’st not? Dromio—thou, Dromio—thou snail, thou slug, thou sot.","Why are you mumbling to yourself instead of answering the order I gave you? Dromio, you drone, you snail, you slug, you idiot!"
"I am transformèd, master, am I not?","I’ve been transformed somehow, haven’t I, master?"
"I think thou art in mind, and so am I.","I think your mind has been altered, and mine too."
"Nay, master, both in mind and in my shape.","No, master, I’ve been changed in both mind and body."
Thou hast thine own form.,Your body looks the same.
"No, I am an ape.","No, I’m an ape ape = a counterfeit (of myself); a fool ape ."
"If thou art changed to aught, ’tis to an ass.","If you’ve changed into anything, it’s an ass."
"'Tis true. She rides me, and I long for grass. 'Tis so. I am an ass; else it could never be","That’s true. She’s riding me hard, and all I want to do is get out of here. I must be as stupid as an ass—that’s why I don’t know her, but she knows me."
"Come, come, no longer will I be a fool, To put the finger in the eye and weep Whilst man and master laugh my woes to scorn. Come, sir, to dinner.—Dromio, keep the gate. — And shrive you of a thousand idle pranks. Sirrah, if any ask you for your master, Say he dines forth, and let no creature enter.— Come, sister.—Dromio, play the porter well.","All right, all right. I won’t play the fool anymore and just cry while my husband and his man laugh at me. Come, husband, let’s go to lunch. Dromio, guard the door. Husband, I’ll eat with you in private today and hear your confession about all the pranks you’ve pulled. Sirrah Sirrah = term of address for a person of low social standing Sirrah , if anyone asks where your master is, say he’s out to lunch, and don’t let anyone come in. Come, sister. Dromio, do a good job as doorkeeper."
"Sleeping or waking, mad or well-advised?","Am I on earth, in heaven, or in hell? Asleep or awake? Crazy or sane? These people know me, but I don’t"
"Known unto these, and to myself disguised! I’ll say as they say, and persever so, And in this mist at all adventures go.","know myself! I’ll agree with them and keep with it, whatever happens."
"Master, shall I be porter at the gate?","Master, should I watch the door?"
"Ay; and let none enter, lest I break your pate.","Yes, and don’t let anyone come in, or else I’ll break your head."
"Come, come, Antipholus, we dine too late.","Come come, Antipholus. We’re late for lunch."
"Good Signior Angelo, you must excuse us all; My wife is shrewish when I keep not hours. Say that I lingered with you at your shop To see the making of her carcanet, But here’s a villain that would face me down He met me on the mart, and that I beat him And charged him with a thousand marks in gold, And that I did deny my wife and house.—","Signior Angelo, please excuse us. My wife gets angry when I’m late. Here’s the story we’ll tell her: that I was with you at your shop, watching you make her necklace, and that you’re going to deliver it tomorrow. But here comes a scoundrel who says he saw me at the marketplace and that I beat on him, told him I’d given him a thousand marks in gold, and then lied about my wife and my house. You drunkard, what was that all about?"
"Say what you will, sir, but I know what I know. That you beat me at the mart I have your hand to show; If the skin were parchment and the blows you gave were ink, Your own handwriting would tell you what I think.","Say what you want, but I know what I know. You beat me at the marketplace, and I have the bruises to prove it. If my skin were paper and your punches were ink, you could read the beating on my body."
I think thou art an ass.,I think you’re an ass.
"Marry, so it doth appear By the wrongs I suffer and the blows I bear. I should kick being kicked; and, being at that pass, You would keep from my heels and beware of an ass.","Honestly, it sure looks that way, judging by all the beatings and the bad treatment I’m getting. Since I’m an ass, I ought to kick like one. Then you’d be scared of me and keep away."
"You’re sad, Signior Balthasar. Pray God our cheer","Signior Balthasar, you look upset. I hope the good meal I’m going to give you will show the goodwill I bear you and how welcome you are."
"I hold your dainties cheap, sir, and your welcome dear.",Your delicacies aren’t worth as much to me as your welcome is.
"O Signior Balthasar, either at flesh or fish A table full of welcome make scarce one dainty dish.","Signior Balthasar, all the welcome in the world can’t compare to a good meal, whatever kind of food it might be."
"Good meat, sir, is common; that every churl affords.",Good food’s not a big deal—everyone can afford that.
"And welcome more common, for that’s nothing but words.","And everyone can say “welcome,” which is just a word."
Small cheer and great welcome makes a merry feast.,A little food and a huge welcome makes a joyous feast.
"Ay, to a niggardly host and more sparing guest. But though my cates be mean, take them in good part. Better cheer may you have, but not with better heart.","Sure, to a cheap host and an even cheaper guest. But look, even if my dishes are poor, eat them with my best wishes. You may come across better food, but not a warmer welcome. What’s this? My door is locked. (to DROMIO) Tell them to let us in."
"Maud, Bridget, Marian, Ciceley, Gillian, Ginn!","Maud, Bridget, Marian, Ciceley, Gillian, Ginn!"
"(within) Mome, malt-horse, capon, coxcomb, idiot, patch! Either get thee from the door or sit down at the hatch. Dost thou conjure for wenches, that thou call’st for such store When one is one too many? Go, get thee from the door.","(from offstage) Dope, moron, eunuch, fool, idiot, clown! Either get away from the door or sit yourself down there! What, are you trying to summon women with your spells—is that why you’re calling out so many names? Isn’t one enough for you? Get away with you!"
What patch is made our porter? My master stays in the street.,What clown did they hire as the new doorkeeper? My master is standing out in the street!
"(within) Let him walk from whence he came, lest he catch cold on ’s feet.",(from offstage) Then he should go back where he came from so he doesn’t catch a cold.
"Who talks within there? Ho, open the door.","Who’s in there? Hey, open the door!"
"(within) Right, sir, I’ll tell you when an you tell me wherefore.",(from offstage) Right. Give me one good reason and I will.
Wherefore? For my dinner. I have not dined today.,A reason? So I can eat lunch. I haven’t eaten today.
(within) Nor today here you must not. Come again when you may.,(from offstage) And you won’t eat here today. Come again some other time.
What art thou that keep’st me out from the house I owe?,"Who do you think you are, keeping me out of my own house?"
"(within) The porter for this time, sir, and my name is Dromio.","(from offstage) I’m the doorkeeper for the moment, and my name is Dromio."
"O villain, thou hast stolen both mine office and my name! The one ne'er got me credit, the other mickle blame. If thou hadst been Dromio today in my place, Thou wouldst have changed thy face for a name, or thy name for an ass.","You jerk! You’ve stolen both my job and my name! True, the job never did me much good, and my name only ever got me in trouble. If you were the Dromio in my shoes today, you would have felt like you traded your head for a target and your name for the name of “Ass.”"
"(within) What a coil is there, Dromio! Who are those at the gate?","(from offstage) What’s all the commotion, Dromio? Who’s at the door?"
"Let my master in, Luce.","Luce, let my master in."
"(within) Faith, no, he comes too late, And so tell your master.","(from offstage) No way, he’s too late. Tell your master that."
"O Lord, I must laugh. Have at you with a proverb: shall I set in my staff?","Oh, Lord, this makes me laugh! I’ll come at you with the old proverb: “Should I make myself at home?”"
"(within) Have at you with another: that’s—When, can you tell?",(from offstage) I’ll come at you with another: “I’d like to see you try it!”
"(within) If thy name be called “Luce,” Luce, thou hast answered him well.","(from offstage) If your name’s Luce, then I say: Luce, good answer!"
"Do you hear, you minion? You’ll let us in, I hope?","Listen up, you slave. Are you going to let us in?"
(within) I thought to have asked you.,(from offstage) I was going to ask you that question.
(within) And you said no.,(from offstage) But you already answered no.
"So, come, help. Well struck! There was blow for blow.","Come, help me bang on the door, master. Well done! We answered them, blow for blow."
"Thou baggage, let me in.","You good-for-nothing, let me in."
(within) Can you tell for whose sake?,(from offstage) Says who?
"Master, knock the door hard.","Master, knock hard upon the door."
(within) Let him knock till it ache.,(from offstage) He can knock till it hurts.
"You’ll cry for this, minion, if I beat the door down.","If I break the door down, slave, you’ll be sorry for this."
"(within) What needs all that, and a pair of stocks in the town?",(from offstage) Why are we putting up with all this? The town’s got a pair of stocks stocks = an instrument of public punishment. Offenders had their hands and feet locked in a wooden frame and were left to be mocked and abused. stocks .
(within) Who is that at the door that keeps all this noise?,(from offstage) Who’s making such a ruckus at the door?
"(within) By my troth, your town is troubled with unruly boys.","(from offstage) I swear, this town’s plagued by troublesome boys."
"Are you there, wife? You might have come before.","Is that you, wife? You could have come sooner."
"(within) Your wife, sir knave? Go, get you from the door.","(from offstage) Your wife, you scoundrel? Get away from the door."
"If you went in pain, master, this knave would go sore.","If she punishes you, master, she’s sure to punish me."
fain have either.,It looks like we’re not going to get food or welcome here.
"In debating which was best, we shall part with neither.","We argued about which was best, and now we won’t get either one."
"They stand at the door, master. Bid them welcome hither.","Master, your guests are just standing here. Tell them they’re welcome."
"There is something in the wind, that we cannot get in.",There’s something strange in the air that’s keeping us from getting in.
"You would say so, master, if your garments were thin. It would make a man mad as a buck to be so bought and sold.","And if your clothes were as thin as mine, you’d really feel the air. The food inside is warm, but you’re out here freezing. It would make any man as mad as a bull to be betrayed like this."
"Go, fetch me something: I’ll break ope the gate.",Go get me something I can use to break down the door.
"(within) Break any breaking here, and I’ll break your knave’s pate.",(from offstage) Break anything here and I’ll break your head.
"A man may break a word with you, sir, and words are but wind, Ay, and break it in your face, so he break it not behind.","I’ll break words with you, sir. And since words are just wind, I’ll be breaking wind right in your face."
"(within) It seems thou want’st breaking. Out upon thee, hind!","(from offstage) It seems you’re the one who needs to be broken. Be off with you, you dog!"
"Here’s too much “out upon thee!” I pray thee, let me in.","I’ve had enough of this “off with you!” Come on, let me in!"
"(within) Ay, when fowls have no feathers and fish have no fin.",(from offstage) Of course—when birds have no feathers and fish have no fins.
"Well, I’ll break in. Go, borrow me a crow.","Well, I’m going to break in. Go get me a crow."
"A crow without feather? Master, mean you so? For a fish without a fin, there’s a fowl without a feather.— (to DROMIO OF SYRACUSE) If a crow help us in, sirrah, we’ll pluck a crow together.","A crow without feathers? Master, do you really mean that? He said “when fish have no fins,” and you came back with a bird with no feathers. (to DROMIO OF SYRACUSE) If a crow gets us in, sirrah, then you and I will have a crow to pluck together “crow to pluck together” = score to settle with each other crow to pluck together ."
"Go, get thee gone. Fetch me an iron crow.",I meant a crowbar. Get going already.
"Have patience, sir. O, let it not be so. Herein you war against your reputation, And draw within the compass of suspect Th' unviolated honor of your wife. Her sober virtue, years, and modesty Plead on her part some cause to you unknown. And doubt not, sir, but she will well excuse Why at this time the doors are made against you. And let us to the Tiger all to dinner, And about evening come yourself alone To know the reason of this strange restraint. If by strong hand you offer to break in A vulgar comment will be made of it; And that supposèd by the common rout Against your yet ungallèd estimation That may with foul intrusion enter in For slander lives upon succession, Forever housèd where it gets possession.","Be patient, sir! Don’t do this! This will hurt your reputation and make your wife, who’s innocent, look suspicious. Look, you’ve known her a long time. She’s wise, serious, mature, and modest. All this suggests that she has a good reason for doing this to you. Let’s assume that she has a reason, which you don’t know yet: have faith that she’ll eventually explain why she shut the doors on you today. Listen to me. Be patient and leave, and we’ll all go to the Tiger for lunch. In the evening, come back alone and figure out this strange resistance. If you get violent and break in now, in broad daylight, people will talk about it. The common mob will presume things, and your untarnished reputation will be damaged—and that damage will last long after you’re dead. Slander passes from generation to generation, and once it sticks to a family, it’s there forever."
"You have prevailed. I will depart in quiet And, in despite of mirth, mean to be merry. Pretty and witty, wild and yet, too, gentle. There will we dine. This woman that I mean, My wife—but, I protest, without desert— Hath oftentimes upbraided me withal; And fetch the chain; by this I know ’tis made. Bring it, I pray you, to the Porpentine, For there’s the house. That chain will I bestow— Be it for nothing but to spite my wife— Since mine own doors refuse to entertain me, I’ll knock elsewhere, to see if they’ll disdain me.","You’re right—I’ll go quietly. And even though I’m in a distasteful mood, I’ll work on being happy. I know a terrific wench. She’s beautiful and charming—a little wild, but also gentle. We’ll eat at her place. My wife has accused me more than once of misbehaving with this woman. I swear to her that I haven’t, but it doesn’t change anything. We’ll go to her place for lunch. (to ANGELO) Go get the necklace, which I’m sure is done by now. Bring it to the Porcupine, where this woman is. I’ll to give it to her, just to spite my wife. Hurry, good sir. Since my own doors refuse to admit me, I’ll knock somewhere else and see if they turn me away as well."
I’ll meet you at that place some hour hence.,I’ll meet you there in an hour.
Do so. This jest shall cost me some expense.,Do that. This little prank of hers is going to cost me.
"And may it be that you have quite forgot A husband’s office? Shall, Antipholus, Even in the spring of love thy love-springs rot? Shall love, in building, grow so ruinous? Then for her wealth’s sake use her with more kindness. Or if you like elsewhere, do it by stealth— Muffle your false love with some show of blindness. Let not my sister read it in your eye; Look sweet, be fair, become disloyalty; Apparel vice like virtue’s harbinger. Bear a fair presence, though your heart be tainted. Teach sin the carriage of a holy saint. What simple thief brags of his own attaint? 'Tis double wrong to truant with your bed And let her read it in thy looks at board. Shame hath a bastard fame, well managèd; Alas, poor women, make us but believe, Being compact of credit, that you love us. Though others have the arm, show us the sleeve; We in your motion turn, and you may move us. Comfort my sister, cheer her, call her wife. 'Tis holy sport to be a little vain When the sweet breath of flattery conquers strife.","Have you completely forgotten your duty as a husband? Antipholus, your marriage is still fresh and new, like the springtime—have the young shoots of your love already started to wither? Is the building of your love already in ruins? If you married my sister for her wealth, then for her wealth’s sake, treat her with more kindness. Or if your affection has already strayed to another woman, at least be stealthy about it. Hide your false love, blindfold yourself so my sister cannot read your faithlessness in your eyes. Watch what you say, and don’t let your own words give away your shame. Look sweet and act kindly—be attractive in your disloyalty. Disguise your misbehavior as integrity, and behave properly even if your heart is tainted. Though you are sinful, carry yourself like a holy saint. Be false in secret: why does she need to know? What foolish thief brags about his crimes? It’s doubly wrong to cheat on your wife and then let her see the offense in your eyes. When you do something shameful, it’s possible to put a good spin on it, but bad deeds are made worse by speaking of them. Alas, poor women! We’re so gullible, we believe it when you say you love us. Even if you love someone else in your heart, make it appear as if you love us. We follow in your orbit, and you have the power to move us. So, my sweet brother-in-law, go inside. Comfort my sister, cheer her up, call her “wife.” It’s a holy thing to lie a little when sweet flattery can smooth over trouble."
"Sweet mistress—what your name is else I know not,","Sweet mistress—I don’t know what other name to give you, or how you’ve figured out mine—you seem as"
"Less in your knowledge and your grace you show not Than our earth’s wonder, more than earth divine. Teach me, dear creature, how to think and speak. Lay open to my earthy gross conceit, The folded meaning of your words' deceit. Against my soul’s pure truth why labour you To make it wander in an unknown field? Are you a god? would you create me new? But if that I am I, then well I know Your weeping sister is no wife of mine, Nor to her bed no homage do I owe. Far more, far more, to you do I decline. To drown me in thy sister’s flood of tears. Sing, Siren, for thyself, and I will dote. Spread o'er the silver waves thy golden hairs, And as a bed I’ll take them and there lie, He gains by death that hath such means to die. Let Love, being light, be drownèd if she sink.","wise and graceful as the earth is wonderful and divine. Teach me how I should think and speak. My understanding is clumsy and human, riddled with errors—it is feeble, shallow, and weak. Reveal to me the hidden meaning of your words. Why would you have me betray the truth of my emotions and make my love wander in some other direction? Are you a god? Are you trying to remake me? Go ahead, I’ll yield to your power. But if I am myself, then I know for sure that your weeping sister is not my wife. I don’t owe her any duty—it’s you that I submit to. Oh, sweet mermaid, don’t command me to drown myself in the flood of your sister’s tears. Siren sirens = mermaids of Greek myth who lured men to their death with their singing Siren , use your song to make me love you instead, and I will obey. Spread your golden hair over the silver waves, and I will lie down in it like a bed. If a man could die “To die” also has the suggestion “to orgasm.” die in that glorious fantasy, then I think he would benefit by dying. Love is light and therefore floats—if my love is false, let me sink!"
"What, are you mad that you do reason so?","Are you insane, talking like this?"
"Not mad, but mated—how, I do not know.","Not insane, but amazed. I don’t know how. 								 In the original “Shakespearean line, “mated” can mean both “overthrown” and “married.”"
It is a fault that springeth from your eye.,Your eyes are playing tricks on you.
"For gazing on your beams, fair sun, being by.","That’s because you are near me, and you’re as dazzling as the sun."
"Gaze where you should, and that will clear your sight.","Train your eye on what you should be looking at, and you’ll see straight again."
"As good to wink, sweet love, as look on night.","Sweet love, I’d rather close my eyes than look at darkness."
Why call you me “love”? Call my sister so.,Why are you calling me “love”? Call my sister that.
Thy sister’s sister.,Your sister’s sister.
That’s my sister.,That’s my sister.
"No, It is thyself, mine own self’s better part, Mine eye’s clear eye, my dear heart’s dearer heart, My food, my fortune, and my sweet hope’s aim, My sole earth’s heaven, and my heaven’s claim.","No, it’s you: my better half. My eye’s clear vision, my heart’s most precious desire. My food, my fortune, my sweetest hope, my heaven on earth, and my entrance to heaven."
"All this my sister is, or else should be.","My sister is all those things, or else she should be."
"Call thyself “sister,” sweet, for I am thee. Thee will I love and with thee lead my life; Thou hast no husband yet, nor I no wife. Give me thy hand.","Call yourself your own sister, because I want you. I will love you, and with you I’ll spend my life. You have no husband yet, and I have no wife. Give me your hand."
"O soft, sir! Hold you still.","Oh, wait, sir. Stay here. I’ll go get my sister and see what she thinks."
"Why, how now, Dromio. Where runn’st thou so fast?","What’s going on, Dromio? Where are you running so fast?"
"Do you know me, sir? Am I Dromio? Am I your man? Am I myself?",Do you know me? Am I Dromio? Am I your servant? Am I myself?
"Thou art Dromio, thou art my man, thou art thyself.","You are Dromio, you are my servant, and you are yourself."
"I am an ass, I am a woman’s man, and besides myself.","I’m an ass, I’m a woman’s servant, and I’m beside myself."
What woman’s man? And how besides thyself?,"What woman’s servant? What do you mean, beside yourself?"
"Marry, sir, besides myself I am due to a woman, one that claims me, one that haunts me, one that will have me.","I’ll tell you. Besides belonging to myself, I belong to a woman. A woman who says she owns me, who won’t leave me alone, and who wants me."
What claim lays she to thee?,How does she claim to own you?
"Marry, sir, such claim as you would lay to your horse; and she would have me as a beast; not that I being a beast she would have me, but that she, being a very beastly creature, lays claim to me.","The same way a person would claim to own his horse. And she wants me as a beast. I don’t mean that she wants me because I’m a beast, but that she, who is a beast, says I belong to her."
What is she?,What’s she like?
"A very reverent body, ay, such a one as a man may not speak of without he say “sir-reverence.” I have but lean luck in the match, and yet is she a wondrous fat marriage.","She has a very significant body. You couldn’t even talk about it without saying, “I beg your pardon.” i.e., you’d have to say “I beg your pardon” when talking about her body because you’d have to use obscene language to discuss it. “I beg your pardon.” My luck would be running thin if I ended up with her, although she’d make it a fat marriage."
How dost thou mean a “fat marriage”?,"What do you mean, a fat marriage?"
"Marry, sir, she’s the kitchen wench, and all grease, and I know not what use to put her to but to make a lamp of her and run from her by her own light. I warrant her rags and the","Sir, she works in the kitchen, so she’s oily. The only thing I could do with her is to use all that oil as fuel in a lamp and then use that light to run away by. Her"
"tallow in them will burn a Poland winter. If she lives till doomsday, she’ll burn a week longer than the whole world.","clothes are so oily, they’d burn through the longest winter. Even if she lives till the end of the world, she’d keep burning an additional week."
What complexion is she of?,What’s her skin like?
"Swart like my shoe, but her face nothing like so clean kept. For why? She sweats. A man may go overshoes in the grime of it.","It’s dark, like my shoe. But it’s not as clean. You’d be up to your ankles in how filthy it is."
That’s a fault that water will mend.,Some water will fix that.
"No, sir, ’tis in grain; Noah’s flood could not do it.","No, it’s permanent. Noah’s flood wouldn’t be enough water to clean it."
What’s her name?,What’s her name?
"Nell, sir, but her name and three quarters—that’s an ell and three quarters—will not measure her from hip to hip.",Nell. But an ell An “ell” is a unit of measure forty-five inches long. ell and three-quarters wouldn’t be long enough to measure her waist.
Then she bears some breadth?,So she’s wide?
"No longer from head to foot than from hip to hip. She is spherical, like a globe. I could find out countries in her.","Her hips are as wide as she is tall. She’s round, like a globe. I could use her like a map to find out where countries are."
In what part of her body stands Ireland?,What part of her body is Ireland?
"Marry, sir, in her buttocks. I found it out by the bogs.","Her bottom. It’s near the bogs A “bog” is a kind of swamp found in Ireland, but it’s also a slang term for toilet. bogs ."
Where Scotland?,Where’s Scotland?
I found it by the barrenness; hard in the palm of the hand.,"In the palm of her hand, which is covered in calluses Shakespeare’s audience would hear “barren ness.” A “ness” in Scotland is a wide-open space—Nell’s calloused palms remind Dromio of the rough, empty terrain of Scotland. calluses ."
Where France?,Where’s France?
"In her forehead, armed and reverted, making war against her heir.","In her forehead At the time this play was written, there had recently been a rebellion against the heir to France’s throne. Since Nell is going bald, Dromio puns that her forehead is like France, rebelling against her hair (or “heir”). forehead , which is enormous because of her receding hairline."
Where England?,Where’s England?
"I looked for the chalky cliffs, but I could find no whiteness in them. But I guess it stood in her chin, by the salt rheum that ran between France and it.","I thought her teeth might be like the white cliffs The White Cliffs of Dover are located in Southern England, along the English Channel. The cliffs are covered in lime, which renders them white in color. white cliffs , but they’re dark and stained. So I guess it’s her chin, which is separated from her forehead by all the sweat on her face."
Where Spain?,Where’s Spain?
"Faith, I saw it not, but I felt it hot in her breath.","Honestly, I didn’t see it, but I felt it in her hot breath."
"Where America, the Indies?",Where’s America and the West Indies?
"O, sir, upon her nose, all o'er-embellished with rubies, carbuncles, sapphires, declining their rich aspect to the hot breath of Spain, who sent whole armadas of caracks to be ballast at her nose.","Oh, sir, on her nose, which is covered with pimples, sores, and red welts. It points straight down at her mouth, which catches everything that drips from it. exotic jewels In Shakespeare’s time, America and the West Indies were known for having exotic jewels. exotic jewels"
"Where stood Belgia, the Netherlands?",Where’s Belgium and the Netherlands The Netherlands were known as the “Low Countries.” Netherlands ?
"O, sir, I did not look so low. To conclude: this drudge or diviner laid claim to me, call’d me Dromio, swore I was assured to her, told me what privy marks I had about me, as the mark of my shoulder, the mole in my neck, the great wart on my left arm, that I, amazed, ran from her as a witch. And, I think, if my breast had not been made of faith, and my heart of steel, She had transformed me to a curtal dog and made me turn i' th' wheel.","Oh, sir, I didn’t look down there. In conclusion, this witch said I was hers. She called me Dromio and swore I’d promised to marry her. She knew private things about my body, like the birthmark on my shoulder, the mole on my neck, and the huge wart on my left arm. I was terrified, and I ran away from her as if she were a witch. And I think that if I hadn’t been brave and strong, she would have turned me into a dog and made me her slave."
"Go, hie thee presently. Post to the road. An if the wind blow any way from shore, If any bark put forth, come to the mart, Where I will walk till thou return to me. If every one knows us, and we know none, 'Tis time, I think, to trudge, pack, and be gone.","Get going—hustle over to the port. If there’s enough wind for a ship to sail out tonight, I won’t spend tonight in this town. If a ship’s leaving, come to the marketplace. I’ll wait there for you. If everyone here knows us but we don’t know anybody, it’s time, I think, for us to pack our bags and take off."
So fly I from her that would be my wife.,I’ll run from this woman who claims to be my wife as fast as I’d run from a bear.
"There’s none but witches do inhabit here, And therefore ’tis high time that I were hence. She that doth call me husband, even my soul Possessed with such a gentle sovereign grace,","Everyone who lives here is a witch. That means it’s high time for me to go. That woman who claims I am her husband—I loathe her in my soul. But her gorgeous sister, who’s so lovely and gracious, who’s so charming and who speaks so well,"
"Of such enchanting presence and discourse, Hath almost made me traitor to myself. But lest myself be guilty to self wrong,",almost makes me want to stay here against my better judgment. I’d better stop up my ears against this siren’s song.
Master Antipholus.,Master Antipholus—
"Ay, that’s my name.","Yes, that’s my name."
"I know it well, sir. Lo, here’s the chain. I thought to have ta'en you at the Porpentine; The chain unfinished made me stay thus long.","I know that, sir. Look, here’s the necklace. I was on my way to take it to you at the Porcupine, but it took a little longer to finish than I thought it would."
What is your will that I shall do with this?,What do you want me to do with this?
"What please yourself, sir. I have made it for you.",Whatever you want—I made it for you.
"Made it for me, sir? I bespoke it not.",Made it for me? I didn’t order it.
"Not once, nor twice, but twenty times you have. Go home with it and please your wife withal, And then receive my money for the chain.","You did—not just once or twice, but twenty times. Take it home and make your wife happy. I’ll come over at suppertime and you can pay me for it then."
"I pray you, sir, receive the money now, For fear you ne'er see chain nor money more.","You should take the money now. If you don’t, you might never see the money or the necklace ever again."
"You are a merry man, sir. Fare you well.","You’re a funny man, sir. Take care."
But this I think: there’s no man is so vain That would refuse so fair an offered chain.,I don’t know what to think about this. But what I do think is that nobody in his right mind would refuse to accept such a beautiful necklace when somebody offers it. I
"I see a man here needs not live by shifts When in the streets he meets such golden gifts. If any ship put out, then straight away.","guess there’s no need to be a thief in Ephesus. People come up to you in the street and hand you gold. I’ll go wait for Dromio at the marketplace. If any ships are sailing, I’ll get right on one."
"You know since Pentecost the sum is due, And since I have not much importuned you, Nor now I had not, but that I am bound To Persia, and want guilders for my voyage. Or I’ll attach you by this officer.","You’ve owed me this money since the Pentecost holiday. I haven’t pressed you for it, and I wouldn’t now except that I’m going to Persia and I need money for the trip. So pay me now, or I’ll have this officer arrest you."
"Even just the sum that I do owe to you Is growing to me by Antipholus. And in the instant that I met with you, I shall receive the money for the same. Pleaseth you walk with me down to his house, I will discharge my bond and thank you too.","Antipholus owes me the exact amount that I owe you. Just before I ran into you, I gave him a necklace. At five o'clock he’s going to pay me for it. Please, come to his house with me. I’ll pay what I owe you then and say thank you as well."
That labor may you save. See where he comes.,"He saves you the trouble: look, here he comes."
And buy a rope’s end. That will I bestow Among my wife and her confederates For locking me out of my doors by day. But soft. I see the goldsmith. Get thee gone.,"(to DROMIO) I’m going to the jeweler’s house. You go buy a piece of rope—I’ll whip my wife and her cohorts for locking me out of my own house. Wait a minute! I see the jeweler. Go, be gone with you. Buy a rope and bring it to me."
I buy a thousand pound a year! I buy a rope!,"I buy myself a thousand beatings a year if I buy a rope. There’s no consensus about the exact meaning of this obscure line, which is an expression of Dromio’s frustration."
"(to ANGELO) A man is well holp up that trusts to you! I promisèd your presence and the chain, But neither chain nor goldsmith came to me. If it were chained together, and therefore came not.","(to ANGELO) Good luck to any man who trusts you. I swore that you would come with the necklace, but neither you nor the necklace showed up. Perhaps you were concerned about being chained to me and so decided not to come."
"Saving your merry humor, here’s the note How much your chain weighs to the utmost carat, The fineness of the gold, and chargeful fashion, Than I stand debted to this gentleman. I pray you, see him presently discharged, For he is bound to sea, and stays but for it.","All joking aside, here’s an invoice spelling out exactly how many carats the necklace weighs as well as the quality of the gold and the workmanship. The total due is about three ducats more than I owe this gentleman. Please, pay him immediately. He’s about to leave on a trip and he’s waiting for the money."
"I am not furnished with the present money. Good signior, take the stranger to my house, And with you take the chain, and bid my wife Disburse the sum on the receipt thereof. Perchance I will be there as soon as you.","I don’t have the cash right now. Besides, I have some business to take care of in town. Good signior, take this stranger to my house. Bring the necklace with you, and tell my wife to pay you the amount due. I might make it back in time to meet you."
Then you will bring the chain to her yourself.,So you’ll bring the necklace to her yourself?
"No, bear it with you lest I come not time enough.",No. You bring it in case I can’t make it.
"Well, sir, I will. Have you the chain about you?","All right, sir, I will. Do you have it with you?"
"An if I have not, sir, I hope you have, Or else you may return without your money.","If I don’t, I hope you do. Or else you’ll leave without your money."
"Both wind and tide stays for this gentleman, And I, to blame, have held him here too long.","Listen, please, give me the necklace. This gentleman’s ready to go. The wind is right and it’s high tide, and I’ve delayed him a long time already."
"Good Lord! You use this dalliance to excuse Your breach of promise to the Porpentine. But, like a shrew, you first begin to brawl.","Good Lord! You’re using this as an excuse for not showing up at the Porcupine like you promised. I should have reprimanded you then for not bringing it, but you started fighting with me first."
"The hour steals on. I pray you, sir, dispatch.","It’s getting late. Please, sir, hurry up."
You hear how he importunes me. The chain!,"Antipholus, you hear how the man pleads with me. Give me the necklace!"
"Why, give it to my wife, and fetch your money.","Give it to my wife, and get your money."
"Either send the chain, or send me by some token.","Come, come. You know I gave it to you just now. Send the necklace to her, or send me with a token that will authorize her to pay me."
"Fie, now you run this humor out of breath. Come, where’s the chain? I pray you, let me see it.","Damn it, this isn’t funny. Where’s the necklace? Let me see it."
"My business cannot brook this dalliance. If not, I’ll leave him to the Officer.","My business cannot wait for this delay. (to ANTIPHOLUS) Good sir, tell me if you’re going to pay me. If not, I’ll turn this man over to the officer."
I answer you? What should I answer you?,Pay you? What should I pay you?
The money that you owe me for the chain.,The money you owe me for the necklace.
I owe you none till I receive the chain.,I owe you nothing until I receive the necklace.
You know I gave it you half an hour since.,You know that I gave it to you a half hour ago.
You gave me none. You wrong me much to say so.,"You gave me nothing, and you wrong me by saying you did."
"You wrong me more, sir, in denying it. Consider how it stands upon my credit.","You wrong me even more, sir, by denying it. Consider how poorly this reflects on me."
"Well, officer, arrest him at my suit.","Well, officer, I charge you to arrest him."
"I do, (to ANGELO) and charge you in the Duke’s name to obey me.","I will. (to ANGELO) And I order you to obey me, in the name of the duke."
"This touches me in reputation. Either consent to pay this sum for me, Or I attach you by this officer.","This harms my reputation. Either pay this sum, Antipholus, or I’ll have this officer arrest you."
Consent to pay thee that I never had?—,"Pay for something I never got? Go ahead, you fool. Arrest me if you dare."
"Here is thy fee. Arrest him, officer. I would not spare my brother in this case If he should scorn me so apparently.","Officer, here’s your fee—arrest him. I would have my own brother arrested if he treated me so terribly."
"I do arrest you, sir. You hear the suit.","You’re under arrest, sir. You hear the charges."
"But, sirrah, you shall buy this sport as dear As all the metal in your shop will answer.","I’ll obey you until I can make bail. But Angelo, you’ll pay for this, even if it costs all the precious metals in your jewelry shop."
"Sir, sir, I will have law in Ephesus, To your notorious shame, I doubt it not.","Sir, the laws of Ephesus will be on my side, and you’ll be embarrassed. I’m certain of it."
"That stays but till her owner comes aboard, And then, sir, she bears away. Our fraughtage, sir, I have conveyed aboard, and I have bought The oil, the balsamum and aqua vitae. Blows fair from land. They stay for naught at all But for their owner, master, and yourself.","Master, there’s a ship from Epidamnum that’s going to set sail as soon as its owner gets on board. I’ve left our luggage on the ship, and I bought the oil, balm, and liquor you wanted. The ship is ready, the wind is up, and the sailors are only waiting for their owner and for you."
"How now? A madman? Why, thou peevish sheep, What ship of Epidamnum stays for me?","What are you, a madman? You annoying idiot, what Epidamnum ship is waiting for me?"
"A ship you sent me to, to hire waftage.","A ship you sent me to find, to book passage out of here."
"Thou drunken slave, I sent thee for a rope And told thee to what purpose and what end.","You drunken slave, I sent you for a rope, and I told you what to do with it."
"You sent me for a rope’s end as soon. You sent me to the bay, sir, for a bark.","Yeah, right—you sent me to get whipped. You sent me to the port to find a ship."
"And teach your ears to list me with more heed. To Adriana, villain, hie thee straight. Give her this key, and tell her in the desk That’s cover’d o'er with Turkish tapestry Tell her I am arrested in the street, And that shall bail me. Hie thee, slave. Begone.— On, officer, to prison till it come.","I’ll debate this with you later, and then I’ll teach you to listen more carefully. Go to Adriana, you scoundrel, and quickly. Give her this key, and tell her that there’s money in the desk that’s covered with a Turkish tapestry. Have her send it to me. Tell her that I’ve been arrested and the money will be my bail. Hurry, you slave! Go! Officer, take me to prison until the money comes."
"To Adriana. That is where we dined, She is too big, I hope, for me to compass. Thither I must, although against my will, For servants must their masters' minds fulfill.","To Adriana? That’s where we had lunch. Where that “sweetheart” said I was her husband! She’s too much for me to handle. But I must go there, against my will: servants must fulfill their masters' wishes."
"Ah, Luciana, did he tempt thee so? Mightst thou perceive austerely in his eye That he did plead in earnest, yea or no? Looked he or red or pale, or sad or merrily? Of his heart’s meteors tilting in his face?","Oh, Luciana, did he tempt you like that? Could you tell from his face if he was serious? Yes or no? Did he look flushed or pale? Sad or happy? Could you tell from his looks what he was feeling in his heart?"
First he denied you had in him no right.,"First, he said you had no right to him."
He meant he did me none; the more my spite.,"He meant he did nothing right for me—which is true, unfortunately."
Then swore he that he was a stranger here.,Then he swore he was a stranger here.
"And true he swore, though yet forsworn he were.","And that’s true—he is being strange. And yet he lies as well, for he’s no stranger."
Then pleaded I for you.,Then I pleaded for you.
And what said he?,And what did he say?
That love i begged for you he begged of me.,That he felt for me the love that I begged him to feel for you.
With what persuasion did he tempt thy love?,How did he try to persuade you to love him?
With words that in an honest suit might move.,"With words that—if they were spoken honestly—might have moved me. First, he praised my beauty, then my eloquence."
Did’st speak him fair?,Did you praise him as well?
"Have patience, I beseech.","Have some patience, please."
"I cannot, nor I will not hold me still; My tongue, though not my heart, shall have his will. He is deformèd, crooked, old, and sere, Vicious, ungentle, foolish, blunt, unkind, Stigmatical in making, worse in mind.","I cannot and I will not keep quiet. My voice will have its way, even if my heart can’t. He is misshapen, crooked, old, and withered. His face is ugly, and his body is even worse—all shapeless, everywhere. He is vicious, mean, foolish, blunt, unkind. His body is deformed, and his mind is worse."
"Who would be jealous, then, of such a one? No evil lost is wailed when it is gone.","Then why be jealous of a person like that? When an evil thing has been lost, no one cries."
"And yet would herein others' eyes were worse. Far from her nest the lapwing cries away. My heart prays for him, though my tongue do curse.","Oh, but I think of him more highly than I say I do—and I wish he looked worse in other women’s eyes. I’m like a lapwing, creating a diversion in order to distract predators from my nest. My heart adores him, even though my tongue curses him."
"Here, go—the desk, the purse! Sweet, now make haste.","Here! Go! The desk! Money! Come on, now! Hurry!"
How hast thou lost thy breath?,How did you lose your breath?
By running fast.,By running fast.
"Where is thy master, Dromio? Is he well?","Where’s your master, Dromio? Is he all right?"
"No, he’s in Tartar limbo, worse than hell. A devil in an everlasting garment hath him, One whose hard heart is buttoned up with steel; A wolf, nay, worse, a fellow all in buff; A back-friend, a shoulder clapper, one that countermands","No, he’s in a place worse than hell. A devil in a tough uniform has him—a man whose heart is as hard as steel. A fiend and a goblin, pitiless and rough. A wolf—no, even worse—a man all in tough leather. A backbiting friend, one who grabs people, who patrols the streets and passageways. A hunting dog that runs in"
"The passages of alleys, creeks, and narrow lands; A hound that runs counter and yet draws dryfoot well,","the opposite direction of its prey, yet can follow the scent of the hunt. A man who puts people away before the verdict is announced."
"Why, man, what is the matter?","Speak, man, what’s the matter?"
I do not know the matter. He is ’rested on the case.,"I don’t know what the matter is, but he’s been arrested for it."
"What, is he arrested? Tell me at whose suit.","What? He’s been arrested? Tell me, who had him arrested?"
"I know not at whose suit he is arrested well, Will you send him, mistress, redemption—the money in his desk?","I don’t know who had him arrested, but the man that arrested him was in a suit of leather. Mistress, will you send him bail? The money in the desk?"
"Go fetch it, sister.","Get it, sister."
"This I wonder at, That he, unknown to me, should be in debt. Tell me, was he arrested on a band?","I don’t understand it. How could he be in debt without me knowing it? Tell me, was he arrested because of a band A “band” is a bond or debt. Dromio hears another meaning: a band of fabric. band ?"
"A chain, a chain. Do you not hear it ring?","Not for a band, but for something stronger: a necklace, a necklace! Don’t you hear it ring?"
"What, the chain?","What, the necklace?"
"No, no, the bell. 'Tis time that I were gone. It was two ere I left him, and now the clock strikes one.","No, no, the bell. It’s time for me to go. It was two o'clock when I left him, and now it’s one."
The hours come back. That did I never hear.,Time’s running backward? I’ve never heard of that.
very fear.,"Oh, sure. When an hour In Shakespeare’s time, “hour” could sound like “ower” (someone who owes money) or even “whore,” both of whom would run from policemen. hour meets a cop, it turns and runs in fear."
As if time were in debt. How fondly dost thou reason!,Time’s not the one in debt. Your logic is so foolish.
"Time is a very bankrout and owes more than he’s worth to season. Nay, he’s a thief too. Have you not heard men say That time comes stealing on by night and day? Hath he not reason to turn back an hour in a day?","Time is always bankrupt: it owes more than it can ever pay back in a season. And Time’s a thief, too—don’t you know the old saying, “Time steals along”? So if Time is in debt and also a thief, and a cop comes, don’t you think Time would turn back an hour?"
"Go, Dromio. There’s the money. Bear it straight, And bring thy master home immediately. Come, sister, I am pressed down with conceit:","Here’s the money, Dromio. Take it to your master and bring him home immediately. Come, sister, my imagination is too much for me: it both comforts me and depresses me."
"There’s not a man I meet but doth salute me As if I were their well-acquainted friend, And every one doth call me by my name. Some tender money to me; some invite me; Some offer me commodities to buy. Even now a tailor called me in his shop And showed me silks that he had bought for me, And therewithal took measure of my body. And lapland sorcerers inhabit here.","Every person I meet greets me like an old friend, and every one of them knows my name. Some of them give me money, some invite me places, some thank me for the kind things I’ve done for them, some try to sell me things. Just now a tailor showed me fabrics he bought especially for me and then started to take my measurements. These are tricks of the imagination, and this place is filled with magicians."
"Master, here’s The gold you sent me for. What, have you got the picture of old Adam new-appareled?","Here’s the money you wanted, master. Hey, have you gotten rid of that Adam Dromio calls the officer “Adam” because, after Adam and Eve were expelled from Eden, Adam wore clothing made of skins, llike the officer’s leather uniform. Adam ?"
What gold is this? What Adam dost thou mean?,What gold is this? Who’s this Adam you speak of?
"Not that Adam that kept the Paradise, but that Adam that keeps the prison; he that goes in the calf’s skin that was killed for the Prodigal; he that came behind you, sir, like an evil angel, and bid you forsake your liberty.","Not the Adam from the garden of Eden, but the Adam from the jailhouse. The one that wears leather clothes. The one that grabbed you and arrested you."
I understand thee not.,I don’t know what you’re talking about.
"No? Why, ’tis a plain case: he that went, like a bass viol in a case of leather; the man, sir, that, when gentlemen are tired, gives them a sob and ’rests them; he, sir, that takes pity on decayed men and gives them suits of durance; he that sets up his rest to do more exploits with his mace than a morris-pike.","No? It’s plain enough. The Adam who looks like a cello, in a big leather case. The one who gives tired people “arrest.” The one who gives ruined men new suits—law suits. The one who’s determined to do more damage with his nightstick than a soldier does with his pike."
"What, thou meanest an officer?",You mean an officer?
"Ay, sir, the sergeant of the band; he that brings any man to answer it that breaks his band; one that thinks a man always going to bed and says “God give you good rest.”","Yes, the leader of the team; the one that gets you if you can’t pay a debt; the one who assumes people are always going to bed and says to them, “Have arrest.”"
"Well, sir, there rest in your foolery. Is there any ships put forth tonight? May we be gone?","Well, sir, stop your joking there. Are any ships leaving tonight? Can we go?"
"Why, sir, I brought you word an hour since that the bark 								Expedition put forth tonight, and then were you hindered by the sergeant to tarry for the hoy Delay. Here are the angels that you sent for to deliver you.","Why, sir, I told you an hour ago that the good ship Expedition was leaving tonight, but then the officer got you, and you decided to wait for the little rowboat Delay. Here’s the bail money you sent me to get."
And here we wander in illusions. Some blessed power deliver us from hence!,"This fellow’s gone mad, and so have I. We’re in some kind of dream world. Please, somebody, get us out of here!"
"Well met, well met, Master Antipholus. I see, sir, you have found the goldsmith now.","Good to see you, Master Antipholus. I see you’ve met with the jeweler. Is that chain you’re wearing the one you promised to give to me?"
"Satan, avoid! I charge thee, tempt me not.","Get away from me, Satan! Don’t try to tempt me!"
"Master, is this Mistress Satan?","Master, is this Satan’s mistress?"
It is the devil.,She’s the devil.
"Nay, she is worse; she is the devil’s dam, and here she comes in the habit of a light wench. And thereof comes that the wenches say “God damn me” that’s as much to say “God make me a light wench.” It is written they appear to men like angels of light. Light is an effect of fire, and fire will burn: ergo, light wenches will burn. Come not near her.","No, she’s worse: she’s the devil’s mother, and she comes to us disguised as an easy wench. And that’s why some women say, “God damn me,” which is the same thing as saying, “God make me an easy wench.” The Bible says the devil looks like an angel of light. But fire also gives off light, and fire will burn you. In other words, easy wenches will burn you. Keep away from this one."
Will you go with me? We’ll mend our dinner here.,"You and your servant are very funny, sir. Will you come with me? Can we finish our lunch?"
"Master, if you do, expect spoon meat; or bespeak a long spoon.","Master, if you eat with her, bring really long silverware."
"Why, Dromio?","Why, Dromio?"
"Marry, he must have a long spoon that must eat with the devil.",Because of the old saying: “He who eats with the devil needs a very long spoon.” You need to keep far away from them.
"(to COURTESAN) Avoid then, fiend! What tell’st thou me of supping? Thou art, as you are all, a sorceress. I conjure thee to leave me and be gone.","(to COURTESAN) Get away, you demon! You talk about eating? You’re a sorceress, like everyone else here. I’ll conjure you, like a spell: get away from me."
"Or, for my diamond, the chain you promised, And I’ll be gone, sir, and not trouble you.","Give me back the ring I gave you at lunch, or give me the necklace you promised in exchange. Then I’ll be gone, sir, and stop troubling you."
"Some devils ask but the parings of one’s nail, a rush, a hair, a drop of blood, a pin, a nut, a cherrystone; but she, more covetous, would have a chain. Master, be wise. An if you give it her, the devil will shake her chain and fright us with it.","Some devils In Revelation : , an angel descends from heaven with a chain to bind the devil with. devils ask for nothing more than nail clippings, a hair, a drop of blood, a pin, a nut, or a cherry pit. But this one’s greedy: she wants a necklace. Be wise, master. If you give it to her, she’ll shake the chain and frighten us, like the angel in the Bible."
"I pray you, sir, my ring or else the chain. I hope you do not mean to cheat me so.","Now listen, either give me my ring or give me the necklace. I hope you’re not trying to cheat me."
"Avaunt, thou witch!—Come, Dromio, let us go.","Be gone, witch! Come, Dromio, let’s go."
"“Fly pride,” says the peacock. Mistress, that you know.","Accusing us of cheating is like the proud peacock accusing someone else of pride. Mistress, you know about that."
"Now, out of doubt Antipholus is mad; Else would he never so demean himself. A ring he hath of mine worth forty ducats, And for the same he promised me a chain. The reason that I gather he is mad, Besides this present instance of his rage, Is a mad tale he told today at dinner Of his own doors being shut against his entrance. On purpose shut the doors against his way. My way is now to hie home to his house And tell his wife that, being lunatic, He rushed into my house and took perforce For forty ducats is too much to lose.","Antipholus has gone insane, no question about it. If not, he’d never behave like this. He has a ring of mine, worth forty ducats, and he promised to give me a necklace in exchange for it. Now he won’t give me either. The reason I think he’s insane, besides the way he just acted, is that he told a senseless story over lunch about being locked out of his own house. His wife probably did it on purpose because she knows what kind of fits he’s having. I must go to his house and tell his wife that he came bursting into my place like a lunatic and stole my ring. It’s my best option: I can’t afford to lose forty ducats."
"Fear me not, man. I will not break away: I’ll give thee, ere I leave thee, so much money, To warrant thee, as I am ’rested for. My wife is in a wayward mood today That I should be attached in Ephesus. I tell you, ’twill sound harshly in her ears.","Don’t worry, man, I won’t try to escape. When it’s time for me to be freed, I’ll pay you the fee you’re entitled to for arresting me. My wife’s in a perverse mood today. She’ll be suspicious when the messenger tells her that I was arrested. I tell you, this will make her angry when she hears about it."
"Here comes my man. I think he brings the money. How now, sir? Have you that I sent you for?","Here’s my servant. I think he’s got the money. Hello there, sir! Do you have what I told you to get?"
"Here’s that, I warrant you, will pay them all.","Yes. And this rope will take care of everybody, I guarantee it."
But where’s the money?,But where’s the money?
"Why, sir, I gave the money for the rope.","Why, sir, I spent it on this rope."
"Five hundred ducats, villain, for a rope?",You idiot! Five hundred ducats for a rope?
"I’ll serve you, sir, five hundred at the rate.",I can get you five hundred ropes for that price.
To what end did I bid thee hie thee home?,Why did I just send you home?
"To a rope’s end, sir, and to that end am I returned.","To get a piece of rope. And here I am, with that piece."
"And to that end, sir, I will welcome you. (beats DROMIO OF EPHESUS)",And I’ll use that piece of rope to welcome you with. (beats DROMIO OF EPHESUS)
"Good sir, be patient.","Good sir, calm down."
"Nay, ’tis for me to be patient. I am in adversity.",You should tell me to calm down—I’m the one who’s suffering here.
"Good now, hold thy tongue.",Hold your tongue.
"Nay, rather persuade him to hold his hands.","No, you should tell him to hold his hands!"
"Thou whoreson, senseless villain.","You son of a bitch, senseless villain!"
"I would I were senseless, sir, that I might not feel your blows.","I wish I were senseless, sir, so that I wouldn’t feel your punches!"
"Thou art sensible in nothing but blows, and so is an ass.",The only thing you can sense are punches—just like an ass.
"I am an ass, indeed; you may prove it by my long ears.—I have served him from the hour of my nativity to this instant, and have nothing at his hands for my service but blows. When I am cold, he heats me with beating; when I am warm, he cools me with beating. I am waked with it when I sleep, raised with it when I sit, driven out of doors with it when I go from home, welcomed home with it when I return. Nay, I bear it on my shoulders as a beggar wont her brat, and I think when he hath lamed me, I shall beg with it from door to door.","I am an ass, indeed: you can tell by my long ears. I’ve served this man from the moment I was born until this very instant, and all I’ve ever gotten from him are bruises. When I’m cold, his beatings keep me warm. When I’m hot, they keep me cool. He wakes me up by beating me, makes me stand by beating me, sends me out of the house and welcomes me back by beating me. Seriously, I carry beatings around with me like a beggar woman carries her baby. I figure that once he’s crippled me, I’ll beg by showing off my beatings."
"Come, go along. My wife is coming yonder.",That’s enough. My wife’s coming.
"Mistress, respice finem, respect your end, or rather, the prophecy like the parrot, “Beware the rope’s end.”","Mistress, think about your end—beware of your death! Or as the parrot says: “Beware of the rope’s end,” and watch out for a hanging."
Wilt thou still talk? (beats DROMIO OF EPHESUS),Are you going to keep talking? (beats DROMIO OF EPHESUS)
How say you now? Is not your husband mad?,"Now what do you think? Your husband’s mad, isn’t he?"
"His incivility confirms no less.— Establish him in his true sense again, And I will please you what you will demand.","This terrible behavior proves it. Doctor Pinch, you’re an exorcist. If you can bring him back to his senses, I’ll pay you whatever you demand."
"Alas, how fiery and how sharp he looks!","Alas, how passionate and angry he looks!"
Mark how he trembles in his ecstasy.,Look! He’s trembling in his fit!
"Give me your hand, and let me feel your pulse.",Give me your hand. Let me take your pulse.
"There is my hand, and let it feel your ear. (strikes PINCH)",Here’s my hand. Let it feel your ear. (he strikes PINCH)
"I charge thee, Satan, housed within this man, To yield possession to my holy prayers And to thy state of darkness hie thee straight.",Satan! You are living inside this man! I order you to release him through my prayers and to return immediately to the darkness you came from. I demand this in the name of all the saints in heaven.
"Peace, doting wizard, peace. I am not mad.","Shut up, you doddering old wizard! I’m not possessed!"
"O, that thou wert not, poor distressèd soul!","Oh, I wish you weren’t, you poor, frightened soul."
"You minion, you, are these your customers? Did this companion with the saffron face Whilst upon me the guilty doors were shut And I denied to enter in my house?","Listen, hussy—is this man one of your customers? Did this fool with the yellow face feast and celebrate in my house today while the guilty doors shut in my face and locked me out of my own house?"
"O husband, God doth know you dined at home, Where would you had remained until this time,","Oh, husband, God himself knows you ate at home. I wish you had stayed there, avoiding these scandals and this public embarrassment!"
"“Dined at home”? Thou villain, what sayest thou?","Ate at home? You there, rogue, what do you have to say about that?"
"Sir, sooth to say, you did not dine at home.","I swear, sir, you did not eat at home."
Were not my doors locked up and I shut out?,"My doors were locked and I was shut out, right?"
"Perdie, your doors were locked, and you shut out.","By God, your doors were locked and you were shut out."
And did not she herself revile me there?,"And she screamed at me, right?"
"Sans fable, she herself reviled you there.",No lie—she screamed at you.
"Did not her kitchen maid rail, taunt, and scorn me?","And her cook yelled, mocked, and teased me, right?"
"Certes, she did; the kitchen vestal scorned you.",She sure did. The kitchen girl mocked you.
And did not I in rage depart from thence?,"And I departed in a rage, right?"
That since have felt the vigour of his rage.,You truly did. My body can prove it because it felt the power of your anger.
(to PINCH) Is’t good to soothe him in these contraries?,(to PINCH) Should I try to soothe him by pretending to agree with his lies?
"It is no shame. The fellow finds his vein And, yielding to him, humors well his frenzy.",Good idea. His servant here has figured out that agreeing is a good way to cope with his anger.
(to ADRIANA) Thou hast suborned the goldsmith to arrest me.,(to ADRIANA) You convinced the jeweler to arrest me.
"Alas, I sent you money to redeem you By Dromio here, who came in haste for it.","For goodness sake, I sent money to bail you out. I gave it to Dromio, who rushed in for it."
"Money by me! heart and goodwill you might, But surely, master, not a rag of money.","You gave money to me? She might have given me her best wishes, master, but she didn’t give me one scrap of money."
Went’st not thou to her for a purse of ducats?,Didn’t you go to her for a purse full of ducats?
"He came to me, and I delivered it.","He did, and I gave it to him."
And I am witness with her that she did.,And I saw her do it.
God and the rope-maker bear me witness That I was sent for nothing but a rope.,I was sent for a rope! God and the rope maker are my witnesses!
I know it by their pale and deadly looks. They must be bound and laid in some dark room.,"Mistress, both the man and his master are possessed. I can tell by how pale and deathlike they look. We must tie them up and leave them in some dark room."
(to ADRIANA) Say wherefore didst thou lock me forth today. (to DROMIO OF EPHESUS) And why dost thou deny the bag of gold?,(to ADRIANA) Tell me! Why did you lock me out today? (to DROMIO OF EPHESUS) And why are you denying that you received the gold?
"I did not, gentle husband, lock thee forth.","My sweet husband, I did not lock you out."
"And, gentle master, I received no gold. But I confess, sir, that we were locked out.","And my sweet master, I received no gold. But I agree, sir, that we were locked out."
"Dissembling villain, thou speak’st false in both.",You lying villain! Both those statements are false.
"Dissembling harlot, thou art false in all, To make a loathsome abject scorn of me. But with these nails I’ll pluck out these false eyes That would behold in me this shameful sport.","You lying slut, everything you say is false. You’re scheming with some damned gang, trying to make a fool of me. With my own bare hands, I’ll scratch out your eyes, which want to see me humiliated."
"O bind him, bind him! Let him not come near me.",Tie him up! Tie him up! Keep him away from me!
More company! The fiend is strong within him.,We need more help! The devil in him is strong!
"Ay me, poor man, how pale and wan he looks!","Oh, my, poor man! How pale and listless he looks!"
"What, will you murder me?—Thou jailer, thou, I am thy prisoner. Wilt thou suffer them To make a rescue?","Are you trying to kill me? jailer, i’m your prisoner. are you going to let them break me out of jail?"
"Masters, let him go.","Gentlemen, let go of him. He’s my prisoner and you can’t have him."
"Go, bind this man, for he is frantic too.","Tie up the servant, for he is mad as well."
"What wilt thou do, thou peevish officer? Hast thou delight to see a wretched man Do outrage and displeasure to himself?","What are you doing, you stupid officer? Do you take some kind of pleasure in seeing a sick man harm himself?"
The debt he owes will be required of me.,"He’s my prisoner. If I let him go, I’ll have to pay his bail fees myself."
"I will discharge thee ere I go from thee. Bear me forthwith unto his creditor, And, knowing how the debt grows, I will pay it.— Home to my house. O most unhappy day!","I’ll pay you. Take me to the man my husband is in debt to. Once I find out what the debt is for, I’ll pay it. Doctor Pinch, please have him brought to my house. What a horrible day!"
O most unhappy strumpet!,What a horrible slut!
"Master, I am here entered in bond for you.","Master, I’m all tied up for you."
"Out on thee, villain! Wherefore dost thou mad me?","Shut up already, you scoundrel! Why are you trying to provoke me?"
Cry “The devil!”,"You’d rather be tied up for nothing? Act insane, good master: scream out, “The devil!”"
God help poor souls! How idly do they talk!,Oh my God! The poor souls—how strangely they talk!
"Go bear him hence Sister, go you with me.","Get him out of here. Sister, come with me."
Say now whose suit is he arrested at.,Now tell me. Who had him arrested?
"One Angelo, a goldsmith. Do you know him?","Angelo, the jeweler. Do you know him?"
I know the man. What is the sum he owes?,I know him. How much does my husband owe?
Two hundred ducats.,Two hundred ducats.
"Say, how grows it due?",For what?
Due for a chain your husband had of him.,For a necklace your husband had him make.
He did bespeak a chain for me but had it not.,"He said he was going to buy me a necklace, but I never saw it."
"Came to my house and took away my ring, The ring I saw upon his finger now, Straight after did I meet him with a chain.","Today your husband came to my place, completely furious. He took my ring, which I just saw on his finger, by the way. Right after that, I saw him with a necklace."
"It may be so, but I did never see it.— I long to know the truth hereof at large.","Maybe so, but I never saw it. Jailer, bring me to the jeweler. I need to hear the truth about all this."
"God for Thy mercy, they are loose again!",God have mercy on us! They broke loose!
And come with naked swords. Let’s call more help To have them bound again.,And they’ve got their swords unsheathed! Let’s call for help and get them tied up again!
Away! They’ll kill us.,Let’s get out of here! They’ll kill us!
I see these witches are afraid of swords.,It looks like these witches are scared of swords.
She that would be your wife now ran from you.,The one who claims to be your wife just ran away from you.
Come to the Centaur. Fetch our stuff from thence. I long that we were safe and sound aboard.,Go to the Centaur and get our stuff. I wish we were safely on board our ship already.
"Faith, stay here this night. They will surely do us no harm. You saw they speak us fair, give us gold. Methinks they are such a gentle nation that, but for the mountain of mad flesh","Look, let’s stay here tonight. Nobody will hurt us. You see how kind everyone is to us, how they just hand us gold. I think this country is so kind that if it weren’t for"
"that claims marriage of me, i could find in my heart to stay here still, and turn witch.","that mountain of insanity that wants to marry me, I could find it in my heart to stay here and become a witch myself."
I will not stay tonight for all the town.,I wouldn’t stay here tonight for the entire town. Go and get our stuff onto the ship.
"I am sorry, sir, that I have hindered you, But I protest he had the chain of me, Though most dishonestly he doth deny it.","I’m sorry that I delayed you, sir. But even though he denies it, I swear he got the necklace from me."
How is the man esteemed here in the city?,What’s this man’s reputation like here in the city?
"Of credit infinite, highly beloved, Second to none that lives here in the city. His word might bear my wealth at any time.","People think very highly of him. The merchants give him unlimited credit. He’s well beloved, second to none in the city. I’d trust him with everything I own."
"Speak softly. Yonder, as I think, he walks.",Speak more quietly: I think he’s coming this way.
"Which he forswore most monstrously to have. Good sir, draw near to me. I’ll speak to him.— Signior Antipholus, I wonder much That you would put me to this shame and trouble, With circumstance and oaths so to deny This chain, which now you wear so openly. Beside the charge, the shame, imprisonment, You have done wrong to this my honest friend, Had hoisted sail and put to sea today. This chain you had of me. Can you deny it?","You’re right. And that necklace around his neck is the very one he swore he didn’t have! Good sir, stay close to me. I’ll speak to him. Signior Antipholus, I can’t believe you’d put me to this kind of shame and trouble—not to mention the scandal you’ve brought on yourself. You swore I never gave you the necklace, but now you’re wearing it openly. Not only has your lie cost you money, shame, and imprisonment, but you’ve also mistreated this honest friend of mine. If it hadn’t been for this dispute, he would have already hoisted sail and left for sea. You got that necklace from me: can you deny that?"
I think I had. I never did deny it.,I got it from you—I never said I didn’t.
"Yes, that you did, sir, and forswore it too.","Yes, you did, sir. In fact, you swore it."
Who heard me to deny it or forswear it?,Who heard me do that?
"These ears of mine, thou know’st did hear thee. Fie on thee, wretch. 'Tis pity that thou liv’st To walk where any honest men resort.","My own ears heard it, and you know it. To hell with you! It’s a shame that you walk the streets with all the honest men."
Thou art a villain to impeach me thus. Against thee presently if thou dar’st stand.,You’re a villain to say this about me. I’ll prove that I’m an honest man and a man of honor if you dare defend yourself.
"I dare, and do defy thee for a villain.","I do dare, and I say that you are the villain."
"Hold, hurt him not, for God’s sake. He is mad.— Some get within him; take his sword away.","(to SECOND MERCHANT) Wait! Don’t hurt him, for God’s sake! He’s crazy! Somebody approach him and take away his sword. Tie up Dromio, too, and take them to my house."
"Run, master, run. For God’s sake, take a house. This is some priory. In, or we are spoiled.","Run, master, run. For God’s sake, find a house to duck into. This looks like an abbey. Go in, or we’re done for."
"Be quiet, people. Wherefore throng you hither?","Be quiet, people! Why have you come here in such a mob?"
To fetch my poor distracted husband hence. And bear him home for his recovery.,"To get my poor, mad husband out from inside there. Let us in so we can tie him up tight and bring him home to recover."
I knew he was not in his perfect wits.,(to SECOND MERCHANT) I knew he wasn’t quite in his right mind.
I am sorry now that I did draw on him.,(to ANGELO) Now I’m sorry I raised my sword against him.
How long hath this possession held the man?,How long has he been possessed like this?
And much different from the man he was. But till this afternoon his passion Ne'er brake into extremity of rage.,"This week he was sad, moody, and depressed and very different from his usual self. But it wasn’t until this afternoon that he broke out into violence."
"Hath he not lost much wealth by wrack of sea? Stray’d his affection in unlawful love, A sin prevailing much in youthful men Who give their eyes the liberty of gazing? Which of these sorrows is he subject to?",Did he lose a lot of money in a shipwreck? Has a close friend of his died? Has he fallen in love with another woman? That’s a sin young men often commit because they allow their eyes to wander. Which of these bad things happened to him?
"Namely, some love that drew him oft from home.","None of them, except the last one. He fell in love, and that made him leave home often."
You should for that have reprehended him.,You should have reprimanded him for that.
"Why, so I did.",I did.
"Ay, but not rough enough.","Fine, but you weren’t harsh enough."
As roughly as my modesty would let me.,I was as harsh as I could be while still being a lady.
Haply in private.,You scolded him in private?
And in assemblies too.,And in public too.
"Ay, but not enough.","Fine, but not enough."
It was the copy of our conference. In bed he slept not for my urging it; At board he fed not for my urging it. In company I often glancèd it. Still did I tell him it was vile and bad.,"It was all we talked about. I kept him awake at night talking about it. He couldn’t eat without me talking about it. When we were alone, it was the only thing I talked about, and when we were with other people, I often found a way to mention it. All I ever did was tell him how hurtful and bad it was."
"And thereof came it that the man was mad. The venom clamors of a jealous woman It seems his sleeps were hinder’d by thy railing, And therefore comes it that his head is light. Thou sayst his meat was sauced with thy upbraidings. Unquiet meals make ill digestions. And what’s a fever but a fit of madness? Thou sayest his sports were hinderd by thy brawls. Sweet recreation barred, what doth ensue But moody and dull melancholy, And at her heels a huge infectious troop Of pale distemperatures and foes to life? In food, in sport, and life-preserving rest To be disturbed, would mad or man or beast. Have scared thy husband from the use of wits.","And that’s why he went crazy. A jealous woman’s poisonous ranting is worse than the bite of a rabid dog. You disturbed his sleep with your complaining, which is why he’s disoriented. You seasoned his food with screams. Stress during mealtime ruins the digestion, and that gave him a raging fever. Fever, as we know, is a kind of madness. You spoiled his fun by fighting with him, and when people can’t enjoy themselves, they grow moody and dull with melancholy—they come very close to being grim and cheerlessly depressed. Next thing you know, all kinds of terrible illnesses break out. Ruining his meals, his enjoyment, and his sleep would drive any man or beast mad. What I’m saying is, your jealousy has pushed your husband away from his sanity."
"She never reprehended him but mildly When he demeaned himself rough, rude, and wildly.— (to ADRIANA) Why bear you these rebukes and answer not?","She was always gentle when she scolded him, even when he behaved in the worst and wildest ways. (to ADRIANA) Why won’t you defend yourself against this woman?"
"Good people, enter and lay hold on him.","She has tricked me into seeing my own faults. Gentlemen, go in there and grab him."
"No, not a creature enters in my house.",Nobody goes into my house!
Then let your servants bring my husband forth.,Then have your servants bring him out.
"Neither: he took this place for sanctuary, Till I have brought him to his wits again Or lose my labor in assaying it.","No: he came here for sanctuary In Shakespeare’s period, people who sought protection in churches and other holy places were considered outside the reach of the law. sanctuary , and that will protect him from you. I’ll try to bring him back to his right mind and work to the end of my abilities to do so."
"I will attend my husband, be his nurse, Diet his sickness, for it is my office And therefore let me have him home with me.",It’s my place to take care of my husband and nurse him back to health. It is my duty and mine alone. So let me take him home.
"Be patient, for I will not let him stir Till I have used the approvd means I have, With wholesome syrups, drugs, and holy prayers, It is a branch and parcel of mine oath, A charitable duty of my order. Therefore depart and leave him here with me.","Be patient. I’m not going to let him leave until I’ve tried every means to cure him. With my healthful potions, drugs, and holy prayers, I’ll make him a complete man again. Healing is part and parcel of my religious vows; it is a charitable duty my order performs. Therefore, depart, and leave him here with me."
I will not hence and leave my husband here; To separate the husband and the wife.,I will not depart and leave my husband here. It doesn’t suit your holiness to separate a husband and his wife.
Be quiet and depart. Thou shalt not have him.,Be quiet and depart. You’re not going to take him.
Complain unto the Duke of this indignity.,Go lodge a complaint about this with the duke.
"Come, go. I will fall prostrate at his feet Have won his grace to come in person hither And take perforce my husband from the Abbess.",Come with me. I’ll fall at his feet and lie there until my pleading and crying convinces the duke to come here and force my husband to leave this abbey.
"By this, I think, the dial points at five. Anon, I’m sure, the Duke himself in person The place of death and sorry execution Behind the ditches of the abbey here.",It’s almost five o'clock. The duke will pass by here soon. He always passes here on his way to that melancholy place where criminals are put to death. It’s just behind this abbey.
Upon what cause?,Why is he going there today?
"To see a reverend Syracusian merchant, Against the laws and statutes of this town, Beheaded publicly for his offense.","To see an elderly, unlucky merchant from Syracuse publicly beheaded for breaking the law and coming here to Ephesus."
See where they come. We will behold his death.,Here they come. We will watch the execution.
Kneel to the duke before he pass the abbey.,Kneel down to the duke before he passes by the abbey.
"If any friend will pay the sum for him, He shall not die; so much we tender him.","One more time, we proclaim this publicly: If anyone will pay this man’s bail, he will not be put to death. This is how well we regard him."
"Justice, most sacred duke, against the Abbess.","Duke, the abbess has wronged me and I seek justice."
She is a virtuous and a reverend lady.,She’s a virtuous and holy lady. She can’t possibly have done you any wrong.
"May it please your Grace, Antipholus my husband, Whom I made lord of me and all I had At your important letters, this ill day A most outrageous fit of madness took him, With him his bondman, all as mad as he, Doing displeasure to the citizens By rushing in their houses, bearing thence Rings, jewels, any thing his rage did like. Whilst to take order for the wrongs I went That here and there his fury had committed. Anon, I wot not by what strong escape, He broke from those that had the guard of him, Each one with ireful passion, with drawn swords, Met us again and, madly bent on us, Chased us away, till, raising of more aid, We came again to bind them. Then they fled And here the Abbess shuts the gates on us And will not suffer us to fetch him out, Nor send him forth that we may bear him hence. Therefore, most gracious duke, with thy command","Your Highness, you were the one who introduced me to my husband, Antipholus, and suggested I marry him. On this terrible day, a most outrageous fit of madness possessed him. It made him run desperately through the streets with his servant, who is just as mad. He angered all the citizens by rushing into their houses and taking rings, jewels, and anything else he felt like. At one point I managed to get him tied up and sent home so that I could make some order out of all the trouble he caused. But somehow, he broke free from his guards. Then he and his crazy servant found us and chased us away with swords. We got more help and came back to capture them, but then they fled into this abbey. We tried to go in, but the abbess stopped us. She wouldn’t let us get him and she wouldn’t send him out. So please, most gracious duke, order her to bring him out so we can get him some help."
"Long since thy husband served me in my wars, And I to thee engaged a prince’s word, When thou didst make him master of thy bed, To do him all the grace and good I could.","A long time ago your husband was a soldier in the wars I led. And when you married him and made him the master of your bed, I gave you my word that I would do everything I possibly could for him."
And bid the Lady Abbess come to me. I will determine this before I stir.,"(to his followers) Go, knock on the gate and bid the abbess come out here and speak to me. I’ll settle this before I go"
"O mistress, mistress, shift and save yourself. My master and his man are both broke loose, Whose beard they have singed off with brands of fire, And ever as it blazed, they threw on him Great pails of puddled mire to quench the hair. My master preaches patience to him, and the while And sure, unless you send some present help, Between them they will kill the conjurer.","Mistress! Run and save yourself. My master and his servant broke loose. They’ve beaten the maids and tied up Doctor Pinch. Then they set fire to his beard and threw sewage to put out the flames. My master keeps telling the doctor to relax, while his servant cuts the doctor’s hair in a ridiculous fashion. If you don’t send some help, they’ll kill Doctor Pinch."
"Peace, fool. Thy master and his man are here, And that is false thou dost report to us.","Shut up, fool! Your master and his servant are here. You’re telling a lie."
"I have not breathed almost since I did see it. He cries for you, and vows, if he can take you, To scorch your face and to disfigure you.","Mistress, I swear on my life that it’s true. It was just moments ago. He’s crying out for you and swears he’ll burn your face and disfigure you if he can get ahold of you."
"Hark, hark, I hear him, mistress. Fly, begone!","Listen, listen! I hear him, mistress. Run, get out of here!"
"Come, stand by me. Fear nothing.—Guard with halberds.","(to ADRIANA) Stand with me. Don’t be scared. (to his men) Guards, get your weapons!"
"Ay me, it is my husband. Witness you That he is borne about invisible. Even now we housed him in the abbey here, And now he’s there, past thought of human reason.","Oh, my, it’s my husband. Look, he can become invisible. Just now we put him in the abbey over here, and now he’s over there. It’s impossible to understand."
"Even for the service that long since I did thee When I bestrid thee in the wars and took Deep scars to save thy life. Even for the blood That then I lost for thee, now grant me justice.","Justice, gracious duke. Please bring me justice! A long time ago I did good service to you. I fought in your wars and took deep wounds to save your life. In exchange for the blood I shed for you then, I ask you for justice now."
I see my son Antipholus and Dromio.,"(to himself) The fear of death might be making me senile, but I think I see my son Antipholus, and Dromio."
"Justice, sweet prince, against that woman there, She whom thou gav’st to me to be my wife, That hath abusèd and dishonored me Beyond imagination is the wrong That she this day hath shameless thrown on me.","Sweet prince, I want justice from that woman there. This woman that you urged me to marry has abused me and dishonored me, doing the most injury possible. The things she has shamelessly hurled on me are beyond imagination."
"Discover how, and thou shalt find me just.",Tell me the details. You know I’ll be fair.
"This day, great duke, she shut the doors upon me","Today, great duke, she locked me out of my house and feasted there with whores."
"A grievous fault.—Say, woman, didst thou so?","That’s terrible! (to ADRIANA) Tell us, woman, did you do that?"
"No, my good lord. Myself, he, and my sister Today did dine together. So befall my soul As this is false he burdens me withal.","No, my good lord. I ate with him and my sister. Damn my soul if these accusations are true!"
But she tells to your Highness simple truth.,"If she’s lying, I pray that I never sleep again at night or wake up during the day."
O perjured woman! —They are both forsworn. In this the madman justly chargeth them.,"Oh, lying woman! Both of them are liars: the madman accuses them justly."
"My liege, I am advisèd what I say, Nor heady-rash, provoked with raging ire, Albeit my wrongs might make one wiser mad. This woman locked me out this day from dinner. That goldsmith there, were he not packed with her, Who parted with me to go fetch a chain, Promising to bring it to the Porpentine, Where Balthasar and I did dine together. Our dinner done and he not coming thither, And in his company that gentleman. (points to the SECOND MERCHANT) There did this perjured goldsmith swear me down That I this day of him received the chain, Which, God he knows, I saw not; for the which I did obey, and sent my peasant home For certain ducats. He with none returned. Then fairly I bespoke the officer To go in person with me to my house. My wife, her sister, and a rabble more Of vile confederates. Along with them They brought one Pinch, a hungry, lean-faced villain, A mere anatomy, a mountebank, A needy, hollow-eyed, sharp-looking wretch, A living dead man. This pernicious slave, Forsooth, took on him as a conjurer, And, gazing in mine eyes, feeling my pulse,","My lord, I know what I’m saying. I’m not drunk, and I haven’t gone mad from anger—even though the wrongs done to me today would drive any man insane. This woman locked me out of the house today at lunchtime, and if he weren’t conspiring with her, this jeweler could confirm my story since he was with me at the time. He left to fetch a necklace and he promised to bring it to the Porcupine, where I was dining with Balthasar. He hadn’t arrived by the time we finished eating, so I went out looking for him. I met him in the street—he was there with that man. (points to the SECOND MERCHANT) That’s when this lying jeweler swore that he had already given me the necklace, which, God knows, he hadn’t. He had me arrested for it, and I went with the officer, sending my servant home to get money for the bail. When my servant returned empty-handed, I politely asked the officer to accompany me to my house. On the way, we came across my wife, her sister, and their gang of vile associates. One of them was a man named Pinch: a hungry, narrow-faced villain; a skeleton; a fraud; a raggedy magician and fortune-teller; a needy, hollow-eyed, emaciated wretch; a walking corpse. He pretended to be some kind of sorcerer, and he gazed in my eyes and took my pulse. Then, with his thin face leering down at mine, he cried out that I was possessed."
"Cries out I was possessed. Then all together They fell upon me, bound me, bore me thence, And in a dark and dankish vault at home There left me and my man, both bound together, I gained my freedom and immediately Ran hither to your Grace, whom I beseech To give me ample satisfaction For these deep shames and great indignities.","Then they all pounced on me, tied me up, carried me away, and left me in a dark, dank cellar in my house. They left me and my servant there, tied together. Eventually I chewed through the ropes and freed myself, and I immediately ran to find you, Your Grace. I beg you: grant me justice for the deep shame I have suffered and the terrible wrongs done to me."
"That he dined not at home, but was locked out.","Your Highness, I can confirm this much: he was locked out of his house and didn’t eat at home."
But had he such a chain of thee or no?,But did he receive a necklace from you?
"He had, my lord, and when he ran in here, These people saw the chain about his neck.","He did, my lord. And when he ran in here, everyone could see that he was wearing that necklace."
"Heard you confess you had the chain of him After you first forswore it on the mart, And thereupon I drew my sword on you, And then you fled into this abbey here,","Besides, I’ll swear I heard you confess that you did receive the necklace, even after you swore at the marketplace that you hadn’t. That’s when I raised my sword against you, and you fled into this abbey—which, I think, you must have escaped from through some kind of trick."
"I never came within these abbey walls, Nor ever didst thou draw thy sword on me. I never saw the chain, so help me heaven, And this is false you burden me withal.","I was never inside this abbey, and you never raised your sword against me. I never saw the necklace, so help me heaven! Everything you charge me with is untrue."
"I think you all have drunk of Circe’s cup. If here you housed him, here he would have been. (to ADRIANA) If he were mad, he would not plead so coldly.","Why, what a complicated case this is! I think you all must have drunk some kind of potion that’s turned you all into animals. (to ADRIANA) If you put him in the abbey, that’s where he’d be. If he were insane, he wouldn’t be pleading his case so sensibly. You say he"
You say he dined at home; the goldsmith here,"ate at home, but the jeweler says he didn’t. Sirrah Sirrah = term of address for a person of low social standing Sirrah , what do you have to say?"
"Sir, he dined with her there, at the Porpentine.","Sir, he ate with this woman at the Porcupine."
"He did, and from my finger snatched that ring.","He did, and he snatched my ring right off my finger."
"'Tis true, my liege; this ring I had of her.","That’s true, my lord: I did get this ring from her."
Saw’st thou him enter at the abbey here?,Did you see him enter this abbey?
"As sure, my liege, as I do see your Grace.","As clearly as I see you, my lord."
"Why, this is strange.—Go call the Abbess hither. I think you are all mated or stark mad.",This is very odd. Get the abbess out here. I think you’re all either bewildered or stark raving mad.
"Most mighty duke, vouchsafe me speak a word. Haply I see a friend will save my life","Mighty duke, please allow me to say something. I think I see a friend who will pay my bail and save my life."
"Speak freely, Syracusian, what thou wilt.","Feel free to say what you wish, Syracusian."
"(to ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS) Is not your name, sir, called Antipholus? And is not that your bondman Dromio?","(to ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS) Isn’t your name Antipholus? And isn’t that Dromio, the man bound to you?"
"But he, I thank him, gnawed in two my cords. Now am I Dromio, and his man, unbound.","I was bound to him an hour ago, sir, but thankfully he chewed through our ropes. Now I’m Dromio and no longer attached to him."
I am sure you both of you remember me.,I’m sure you both remember me.
"Ourselves we do remember, sir, by you. You are not Pinch’s patient, are you, sir?","Actually, it’s ourselves you bring to mind since just a few moments ago we were tied up, as you are now. You’re not one of Pinch’s patients, are you, sir?"
Why look you strange on me? you know me well.,Why are you looking at me so strangely? You know me well.
I never saw you in my life till now.,I never saw you before in my life.
"O, grief hath changed me since you saw me last, Have written strange defeatures in my face. But tell me yet, dost thou not know my voice?","Oh, grief has transformed me since the last time you saw me. Time has the power to deform people, and the sorrowful hours I have spent in his company have put these strange lines and wrinkles on my face. But tell me this: don’t you know my voice?"
Neither.,No.
"Dromio, nor thou?","Don’t you, Dromio?"
"No, trust me, sir, nor I.","No sir, trust me, I do not."
I am sure thou dost.,I am sure you do.
"Ay, sir, but I am sure I do not, and whatsoever a man denies, you are now bound to believe him.","Fine, sir, but I’m sure I don’t. And you’re in no position to doubt my word."
"Not know my voice! O time’s extremity, Hast thou so crack’d and splitted my poor tongue Knows not my feeble key of untuned cares? Though now this grainèd face of mine be hid In sap-consuming winter’s drizzled snow, And all the conduits of my blood froze up, My wasting lamps some fading glimmer left, My dull deaf ears a little use to hear. All these old witnesses—I cannot err— Tell me thou art my son Antipholus.","You don’t know my voice? Oh, severe Time! Have you mangled my tongue so badly in these seven short years that my only son can no longer recognize my weak, sorrow-ravaged voice? It’s true: this aged face of mine is hidden by a snow white beard, and the blood is freezing in my veins. But I still have a little memory left, and there’s still some fire in my eyes; my dull, deaf ears can still hear a little. All these aging faculties tell me—and I cannot be wrong—that you are my son, Antipholus."
I never saw my father in my life.,I never saw my father in my life.
"But seven years since, in Syracusa, boy, Thou know’st we parted. But perhaps, my son, Thou sham’st to acknowledge me in misery.","You know that we parted only seven years ago, in Syracuse. Maybe you’re ashamed to admit that you know me because I’m a prisoner now."
The Duke and all that know me in the city I ne'er saw Syracusa in my life.,The duke and everyone who knows me in this city can confirm that’s not true. I’ve never been to Syracuse in my life.
"I tell thee, Syracusian, twenty years Have I been patron to Antipholus, During which time he ne'er saw Syracusa.","I tell you, Syracusian. I’ve been looking after Antipholus for twenty years, and during that time he’s never been to Syracuse. Your old age and the prospect of death are making you imagine things."
"Most mighty duke, behold a man much wronged.","Mighty duke, look here and see a man who’s been treated most terribly!"
"I see two husbands, or mine eyes deceive me.","Either my eyes deceive me, or I see two husbands."
(looks at the ANTIPHOLUS twins) One of these men is genius to the other. And which the spirit? Who deciphers them?,"(looks at the ANTIPHOLUS twins) One of these men is the other’s genius. (looks at the DROMIO twins) And the same with these two. But which is the man and which is the spirit genius = attendant spirit, believed to follow a person throughout his life spirit ? Can anyone tell?"
"I, sir, am Dromio. Command him away.","I, sir, am Dromio. Command this man to leave."
"I, sir, am Dromio. Please, let me stay.","I, sir, am Dromio. Pray, let me stay."
"Egeon art thou not, or else his ghost?","You are Egeon, aren’t you? Or are you his ghost?"
"O, my old master.—Who hath bound him here?","Oh, my old master!—Who tied him up?"
"Whoever bound him, I will loose his bonds And gain a husband by his liberty.— Speak, old Egeon, if thou be’st the man That bore thee at a burden two fair sons. O, if thou be’st the same Egeon, speak, And speak unto the same Emilia.","Whoever tied him up, I will loosen the ropes, and with his freedom I will gain a husband. Tell us, old Egeon: are you the man who once had a wife named Emilia, who gave birth to two fair sons? Oh, if you are the same Egeon, speak now, and speak to that same Emilia!"
"Why, here begins his morning story right; And these two Dromios, one in semblance— Besides her urging of her wreck at sea— These are the parents to these children, Which accidentally are met together.","Why, now the story the merchant told me this morning is starting to make sense. These two Antipholuses, who look so alike—and these two Dromios, who seem to have the same face—and her story of being shipwrecked—why, these two are the parents of these children and have been reunited by accident."
"If thou art she, tell me where is that son That floated with thee on the fatal raft?","If I’m not dreaming, you are Emilia. If it’s really you, tell me what happened to our son, who floated away with you on that deadly raft."
By men of Epidamnum he and I And the twin Dromio all were taken up; By force took Dromio and my son from them And me they left with those of Epidamnum. What then became of them I cannot tell; I to this fortune that you see me in.,"Some men from Epidamnum rescued me, our son, and Dromio. But then a gang of violent fishermen from Corinth kidnapped Dromio and my son and carried them away. I don’t know what became of them. You can see what became of me."
Corinth first.,"Antipholus, aren’t you originally from Corinth?"
"No, sir, not I. I came from Syracuse.","No, sir. I came from Syracuse."
"Stay, stand apart. I know not which is which.","Wait, don’t stand next to each other. I can’t tell who’s who."
"I came from Corinth, my most gracious lord.","I came from Corinth, Your Highness."
And I with him.,And I came with him.
"Brought to this town by that most famous warrior Duke Menaphon, your most renownèd uncle.","Your renowned uncle, Duke Menaphon, the famous soldier, brought me here."
Which of you two did dine with me today?,Which of you two ate lunch with me today?
"I, gentle mistress.","I did, kind lady."
And are not you my husband?,"And you’re my husband, right?"
"No, I say nay to that.","No, he’s not. I say no to that."
"And so do I, yet did she call me so, And this fair gentlewoman, her sister here, Did call me brother. (to LUCIANA) What I told you then I hope I shall have leisure to make good,","So do I, although she called me her husband. And this beautiful gentlewoman, her sister, called me brother. (to LUCIANA) If all this is for real, I hope I’ll get the chance to make good on all the things I said to you today."
"That is the chain, sir, which you had of me.","That’s the necklace I gave you, sir."
"I think it be, sir. I deny it not.","I think it is, sir. I don’t deny it."
"And you, sir, for this chain arrested me.","And you, sir, had me arrested over that necklace."
"I think I did, sir. I deny it not.","I think I did, sir. I don’t deny it."
"By Dromio, but I think he brought it not.","I sent Dromio to you with money for bail, but I don’t think he brought it to you."
"No, none by me.","No, he didn’t get any by me."
"This purse of ducats I received from you, And Dromio my man did bring them me. And I was ta'en for him, and he for me, And thereupon these errors are arose.","I got this purse full of money from you, and my Dromio brought it to me. It seems that we kept running into each other’s servants all day. And everyone thought I was him, and he was me, and that’s how all these errors came about."
These ducats pawn I for my father here.,I want to use this money to set my father free.
It shall not need. Thy father hath his life.,That’s not necessary. I’m going to let him live.
"Sir, I must have that diamond from you.","Sir, I must get that diamond ring back from you."
"There, take it; and much thanks for my good cheer.","There, take it, and thanks for taking such good care of me."
"Renownèd duke, vouchsafe to take the pains To go with us into the abbey here And hear at large discoursed all our fortunes, That by this sympathizèd one day’s error Have suffered wrong. Go, keep us company, And we shall make full satisfaction.— Thirty-three years have I but gone in travail My heavy burden ne'er deliverèd.— The Duke, my husband, and my children both, And you, the calendars of their nativity, Go to a gossips' feast, and go with me.","Renowned duke, please join us in the abbey, where we will discuss at length all that has happened to us. Everyone assembled here who has been troubled by the day’s events join us as well, and we will straighten everything out. My sons, waiting to hear news of you has been like a second childbirth: this time, my labor lasted thirty-three years, and I am only now delivered of my heavy burden. Duke Solinus, my husband, and both my children—and you two Dromios, who marked the day of my sons' births with your own—come into the abbey with me for a new christening. After such a long period of grief, we will have such a celebration!"
With all my heart I’ll gossip at this feast.,"With all my heart, I’ll join you."
"(to ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS) Master, shall I fetch your stuff from shipboard?","(to ANTIPHOLUS OF EPHESUS) Master, should I go get your luggage off the ship?"
"Dromio, what stuff of mine hast thou embarked?","Dromio, what stuff of mine did you put on a ship?"
"Your goods that lay at host, sir, in the Centaur.","The stuff you had at the Centaur, sir."
"He speaks to me.—I am your master, Dromio. Come, go with us. We’ll look to that anon. Embrace thy brother there. Rejoice with him.","He means me. I’m your master, Dromio. Come inside with us: we’ll deal with that later. Embrace your brother there, and rejoice with him."
"There is a fat friend at your master’s house She now shall be my sister, not my wife.","You have a fat friend at your master’s house: she took care of me in the kitchen today, thinking I was you. I guess now she’s going to be my sister-in-law and not my wife."
"Methinks you are my glass, and not my brother: I see by you I am a sweet-faced youth. Will you walk in to see their gossiping?","I think you’re my mirror, not my brother. And I can see by looking at you that I’m a pretty good-looking fellow. Do you want to go in and join the party?"
"Not I, sir. You are my elder.","After you, sir. You’re older than me."
That’s a question. How shall we try it?,That’s a good point. How can we tell which of us is the oldest?
"We’ll draw cuts for the signior. Till then, lead thou first.","We’ll draw straws. Meanwhile, after you."
"Nay, then, thus: We came into the world like brother and brother,","No, I’ll tell you what. We came into the world as brother and brother, so now let’s enter hand in hand—not one before the other."
