"Oh, for a muse of fire that would ascend The brightest heaven of invention! A kingdom for a stage, princes to act, And monarchs to behold the swelling scene! Assume the port of Mars, and at his heels, Leashed in like hounds, should famine, sword, and fire Crouch for employment. But pardon, gentles all, The flat unraisèd spirits that hath dared So great an object. Can this cockpit hold The vasty fields of France? Or may we cram Within this wooden O the very casques That did affright the air at Agincourt? Attest in little place a million, And let us, ciphers to this great account, On your imaginary forces work. Suppose within the girdle of these walls Whose high uprearèd and abutting fronts The perilous narrow ocean parts asunder. Piece out our imperfections with your thoughts. Into a thousand parts divide one man, Think, when we talk of horses, that you see them Printing their proud hoofs i' th' receiving earth, For ’tis your thoughts that now must deck our kings, Carry them here and there, jumping o'er times,","If only we had divine inspiration, our play might rise to the highest level of imagination. If we had a stage as big as a kingdom, real kings and queens to act the part of kings and queens, and royalty to also witness the glorious spectacle, then it would be as it really was. Then valiant King Harry would resemble the god of war, as he did in life, and famine, sword, and fire would sit like dogs at his feet, waiting to be unleashed. But, ladies and gentlemen, since that’s not the case, you must forgive us plain, ordinary men who dare to act out so great a story on this humble stage. Can this theater seem to contain the sweeping fields of France? Could we even squeeze into this little theater the helmets that looked so frightening at Agincourt? Hardly! But, pardon us, because just as a few strokes of a pen, a few zeros, can signify a huge number, we, who are zeros in this great story, can work on your imagination. Pretend that within the confines of this theater sit two great kingdoms divided by a narrow but perilous ocean. Let your thoughts make up for our imperfections. Divide each man into a thousand, and there you will have an imaginary army. Imagine, when we talk of horses, that you see them planting their proud hooves in the soft earth. Because now it is your thoughts that must dress up our kings and transport them from place to place. Your thoughts must leap over huge spans of time, turning the events of many"
"Into an hour-glass; for the which supply, Admit me chorus to this history; Who, prologue-like, your humble patience pray Gently to hear, kindly to judge our play.","years into the space of a few hours. To that end, consider me a sort of chorus, here to help tell the story. And, as the speaker of any prologue should, I ask you to hear our play courteously and to judge it kindly."
"My lord, I’ll tell you that self bill is urged Which in th' eleventh year of the last king’s reign Was like, and had indeed against us passed But that the scambling and unquiet time","My lord, this bill that’s being proposed is the same one that was proposed in the eleventh year of old King Henry’s reign. Everyone thought it would pass then, and it probably would have had it not been for the great civil unrest and uncertainty of the time, which required the matter to be put off."
"But how, my lord, shall we resist it now?","But how will we keep it from being passed now, my lord?"
"It must be thought on. If it pass against us, We lose the better half of our possession, For all the temporal lands which men devout Would they strip from us, being valued thus: “As much as would maintain, to the King’s honor, Full fifteen earls and fifteen hundred knights, Six thousand and two hundred good esquires; Of indigent faint souls past corporal toil, A hundred almshouses right well supplied; And to the coffers of the King besides, A thousand pounds by th' year.” Thus runs the bill.","We have to think about that. If it does pass, the Church will lose more than half of what it possesses, because the bill would strip us of enough real estate left to the church by wealthy, pious men in their wills to support fifteen earls and fifteen hundred knights, six thousand two hundred squires, and a hundred well-supplied almshouses for the relief of lepers, old-age pensioners, the poor, and those too weak or sick to work. Add to that a yearly sum of a thousand pounds to go directly into the king’s coffers. That’s what the bill says."
This would drink deep.,That would be quite a drain.
'Twould drink the cup and all.,It would drain us dry.
But what prevention?,But what can be done to prevent it?
The king is full of grace and fair regard.,The king is virtuous and kind.
And a true lover of the holy Church.,And a true lover of the holy Church.
"The breath no sooner left his father’s body But that his wildness, mortified in him, Seemed to die too. Yea, at that very moment Consideration like an angel came Leaving his body as a paradise T' envelop and contain celestial spirits. Never was such a sudden scholar made, Never came reformation in a flood Nor never Hydra-headed willfulness So soon did lose his seat, and all at once, As in this king.","You wouldn’t have expected it based on how he acted as a youth. But no sooner had his father stopped breathing than the prince’s wildness died too. Really, at that precise moment he gained a capacity for reflection, which appeared like an angel to chase away the sinful part of him, leaving his body like a paradise, fit to house only lofty thoughts and feelings. You never saw anyone become serious and studious so quickly. You never saw such a total transformation, as though a wild river, rushing through, had swept away his faults. Such a collection of stubborn character flaws was never banished from one place so suddenly as in the case of this king."
We are blessèd in the change.,We are fortunate in the change.
"And, all-admiring, with an inward wish, You would desire the King were made a prelate. Hear him debate of commonwealth affairs, You would say it hath been all in all his study. A fearful battle rendered you in music. Turn him to any cause of policy, The Gordian knot of it he will unloose Familiar as his garter; that, when he speaks, And the mute wonder lurketh in men’s ears To steal his sweet and honeyed sentences; So that the art and practic part of life Must be the mistress to this theoric; Since his addiction was to courses vain, His companies unlettered, rude, and shallow, His hours filled up with riots, banquets, sports, And never noted in him any study, From open haunts and popularity.","If you just listen to him discuss theological matters, you’ll find yourself thinking privately what an excellent bishop he would make. Hear him debate matters of domestic policy, and you’d swear he had made them his constant study. Listen to him talk about war, and you’ll hear elegant and thrilling accounts of the battles. Bring up any political topic, and he’ll untangle it as easily as if it were his own garter A garter was a band used to hold up stockings or shirt sleeves. garter . And the result is that when he speaks, the very air—which is free to go where it likes—stops dead, and men stand in silent wonder, hoping to catch the benefit of his gorgeous utterances. There must be skill and experience behind all this abstract thought, but it’s anyone’s guess how he obtained it, since in his youth he preferred shallow pursuits, with uneducated, crude and superficial companions. He spent his time drunken, overfed, and constantly seeking out entertainment, with no inclination for learning or quiet contemplation, nor any limit to his tolerance for public haunts and crowds."
"The strawberry grows underneath the nettle, And wholesome berries thrive and ripen best Neighbored by fruit of baser quality; Under the veil of wildness, which, no doubt, Grew like the summer grass, fastest by night, Unseen yet crescive in his faculty.","Strawberries grow underneath nettle plants, and berries grow best when they’re planted next to inferior fruit. In the same way, the prince hid his serious side under the guise of wild behavior. Just like summer grass, which grows fastest during the night, this sober quality was able to grow and thrive all the better for being undetected."
"It must be so, for miracles are ceased, How things are perfected.","That must be it, because the age of miracles is passed, and we have to find reasonable explanations for why these things happen."
"But, my good lord, How now for mitigation of this bill Urged by the Commons? Doth his Majesty","But tell me, my lord: as to the softening of this bill proposed by the House of Commons, does his Majesty favor it or not?"
"He seems indifferent, Or rather swaying more upon our part Than cherishing th' exhibitors against us; For I have made an offer to his Majesty— And in regard of causes now in hand, Which I have opened to his Grace at large, As touching France—to give a greater sum Than ever at one time the clergy yet","He seems neutral, perhaps leaning a little more toward our side than that of our opponents—since I’ve made his Majesty an offer, following a meeting with our fellow bishops. The offer regards certain matters having to do with France that his Grace and I have been discussing. My offer would involve us giving him a greater sum than the clergy ever gave at one time to any of his predecessors."
"How did this offer seem received, my lord?","How did he take the offer, my lord?"
"With good acceptance of his Majesty— Save that there was not time enough to hear, As I perceived his Grace would fain have done, Of his true titles to some certain dukedoms, And generally to the crown and seat of France, Derived from Edward, his great-grandfather.","Favorably, except that there wasn’t enough time for his Grace to hear, as I sensed he would have liked to, the details about how he is rightfully entitled to certain dukedoms in France, and to the throne of France in general, through clear lines of descent originating with his great-grandfather, Edward III."
What was th' impediment that broke this off?,What kept you from telling him this?
"Craved audience. And the hour, I think, is come To give him hearing. Is it four o'clock?","The French ambassador arrived at that moment and asked to see the king. And, in fact, I think they’re meeting together right now. Is it four o'clock?"
It is.,It is.
"Then go we in to know his embassy, Before the Frenchman speak a word of it.",Then let’s go in and hear what he has to say—though I think I can guess before the Frenchman has uttered a word.
"I’ll wait upon you, and I long to hear it.",I’ll accompany you. I’m also eager to hear it.
Where is my gracious lord of Canterbury?,Where is my gracious lord of Canterbury?
Not here in presence.,He’s not here.
"Send for him, good uncle.","Send for him, dear uncle."
"Shall we call in th' ambassador, my liege?","Shall we call in the ambassador, my liege?"
"Before we hear him, of some things of weight That task our thoughts concerning us and France.","Not yet, cousin. Before I hear him, I want to decide some important issues that are on my mind concerning my throne and France."
God and his angels guard your sacred throne And make you long become it.,May God and his angels guard your sacred throne and grant that you dignify it for a long time.
"My learnèd lord, we pray you to proceed And justly and religiously unfold Why the law Salic that they have in France Or should or should not bar us in our claim. That you should fashion, wrest, or bow your reading, Or nicely charge your understanding soul With opening titles miscreate, whose right Suits not in native colors with the truth; Shall drop their blood in approbation","Thank you, I’m sure. My learned lord, kindly explain to us the legal and religious grounds for why this French Salic law either should or shouldn’t bar me in my claim. And God forbid, my dear and faithful lord, that you should invent, twist, or distort your interpretation, or burden your conscience by subtly arguing for false claims. For God knows how many healthy men will shed their blood in support of whatever you persuade me to do. So think carefully before you incite me"
"Of what your reverence shall incite us to. Therefore take heed how you impawn our person, How you awake our sleeping sword of war. For never two such kingdoms did contend Without much fall of blood, whose guiltless drops Are every one a woe, a sore complaint 'Gainst him whose wrong gives edge unto the swords Under this conjuration, speak, my lord, For we will hear, note, and believe in heart That what you speak is in your conscience washed As pure as sin with baptism.","to wage war. I charge you, in the name of God, be careful what you say. For mighty kingdoms such as England and France have never gone to war with one another without much bloodshed, every innocent drop of which cries out against the wrongdoer who caused such loss of life without good reason. With this in mind, speak, my lord. And I will listen, consider, and earnestly believe that what you say is spoken with a conscience as pure as a newly baptized soul."
"That owe yourselves, your lives, and services To this imperial throne. There is no bar To make against your Highness' claim to France But this, which they produce from Pharamond: (No woman shall succeed in Salic land), Which Salic land the French unjustly gloze To be the realm of France, and Pharamond The founder of this law and female bar. That the land Salic is in Germany, Between the floods of Sala and of Elbe, Where Charles the Great, having subdued the Saxons, There left behind and settled certain French, For some dishonest manners of their life, Established then this law: to wit, no female Should be inheritrix in Salic land, Which “Salic,” as I said, ’twixt Elbe and Sala","Then hear me, gracious sovereign, and all you peers who owe your lives and duty to this imperial throne. There is no legal obstacle to your Highness’s claim to France except the following rule, which the French cite from King Pharamond: In terram Salicam mulieres ne succedant (No woman shall inherit property in the Salic land). The French wrongly interpret “the Salic land” to mean France, and they cite Pharamond as the founder of this law that bars female succession to the throne. But their own authors assert that the Salic land is in Germany, between the Sala and the Elbe rivers, where Charles the Great left behind certain French settlements after conquering the Saxons. The French settlers despised the German women because they were unfaithful to their husbands, so the settlers passed this law that no woman should have right of inheritance in Salic land. And the Salic land—the region between the Elbe and the Sala, in Germany, as I said—is now called Meissen. It is clear, then, that the Salic law was not"
"Then hear me, gracious sovereign, and you peers That owe yourselves, your lives, and services To this imperial throne. There is no bar To make against your Highness' claim to France “In terram Salicam mulieres ne succedant” (No woman shall succeed in Salic land), Which Salic land the French unjustly gloze To be the realm of France, and Pharamond Yet their own authors faithfully affirm That the land Salic is in Germany, Between the floods of Sala and of Elbe, Where Charles the Great, having subdued the Saxons, Who, holding in disdain the German women For some dishonest manners of their life, Established then this law: to wit, no female Should be inheritrix in Salic land, Is at this day in Germany called Meissen. Then doth it well appear the Salic law Was not devisèd for the realm of France, Nor did the French possess the Salic land After defunction of King Pharamond, Idly supposed the founder of this law; Who died within the year of our redemption Four hundred twenty-six; and Charles the Great Beyond the river Sala in the year Eight hundred five. Besides, their writers say, King Pepin, which deposèd Childeric, Did, as heir general, being descended Make claim and title to the crown of France. Hugh Capet also, who usurped the crown Of Charles the duke of Lorraine, sole heir male Of the true line and stock of Charles the Great, Though in pure truth it was corrupt and naught, Conveyed himself as th' heir to th' Lady Lingare, Daughter to Charlemagne, who was the son To Lewis the Emperor, and Lewis the son Who was sole heir to the usurper Capet, Could not keep quiet in his conscience, Wearing the crown of France, till satisfied That fair Queen Isabel, his grandmother, Daughter to Charles the foresaid duke of Lorraine, By the which marriage the line of Charles the Great Was reunited to the crown of France. So that, as clear as is the summer’s sun, King Lewis his satisfaction, all appear To hold in right and title of the female.","intended for the realm of France. Nor did the French possess the Salic land until four hundred twenty-one years after the death of King Pharamond, incorrectly thought to be the founder of the law. He died in the year , and Charles the Great conquered the Saxons and settled Frenchmen in the region beyond the river Sala in the year . Besides, according to the French historians, King Pepin, who deposed Childeric, based his own claim to the crown of France on his descent from Blithild, the daughter of King Clothair. Another case: Hugh Capet, who usurped the crown from Charles the duke of Lorraine—sole male heir in a direct line from Charles the Great—passed himself off as heir to Lady Lingare, daughter of Charlemagne, who was the son of Lewis the Emperor (who was the son of Charles the Great), in order to give his claim to the throne more validity (though, in fact, the claim was completely false and worthless). Another case: King Lewis the Tenth, who was sole heir to the usurper Capet, could not rest easy as king until he was assured that Queen Isabel, his grandmother, was a direct descendent of the Lady Ermengare, daughter of the aforementioned Charles duke of Lorraine, by which marriage the line of Charles the Great was reunited with the throne of France. Thus, it should be clear as day that King Pepin’s title, Hugh Capet’s claim, and the resolution of King Lewis’s doubts all plainly derive from the female."
"So do the kings of France unto this day, Howbeit they would hold up this Salic law And rather choose to hide them in a net Than amply to imbar their crooked titles Usurped from you and your progenitors.","To this day, the kings of France follow this unspoken rule, even though they point to this Salic law to bar your Highness from inheriting it through the female line. They prefer to obscure matters rather than reveal how corrupt their own claims to the French crown are. They usurped that crown from you and your ancestors."
May I with right and conscience make this claim?,Can I justifiably and in good conscience make this claim?
"For in the Book of Numbers is it writ: “When the man dies, let the inheritance Descend unto the daughter.” Gracious lord, Stand for your own, unwind your bloody flag, Go, my dread lord, to your great-grandsire’s tomb, From whom you claim. Invoke his warlike spirit And your great-uncle’s, Edward the Black Prince, Who on the French ground played a tragedy, Whiles his most mighty father on a hill Stood smiling to behold his lion’s whelp Forage in blood of French nobility. O noble English, that could entertain And let another half stand laughing by, All out of work and cold for action!","If not, mighty sovereign, let the blame be mine. For it is written in the book of Numbers: “When the man dies, let the inheritance descend unto the daughter.” Gracious lord, claim what is yours. Unfurl your banners of war. Take your mighty ancestors as models. Go to the tomb of your great-grandfather, from whom your own title to the crown derives. Invoke his warlike spirit and that of Edward the Black Prince, your great-uncle, who fought a tragic battle on French soil, routing the French army in full force while his mighty father stood by on a hilltop, smiling to see his son steeped in the blood of French noblemen. O noble English, who could take on the entire French army with only half their forces, leaving the other half to stand by, idle and laughing."
"Awake remembrance of these valiant dead And with your puissant arm renew their feats. The blood and courage that renownèd them Runs in your veins; and my thrice-puissant liege Is in the very May-morn of his youth, Ripe for exploits and mighty enterprises.","Awaken the memory of those valiant ancestors and with your own powerful arm make their deeds live again. You are their heir and sit on their throne, and the blood and courage that glorified them run in your veins. You, my most powerful sovereign, are in the very prime of youth, ripe for glorious deeds and great enterprises."
Do all expect that you should rouse yourself As did the former lions of your blood.,"The other kings throughout the world all expect you to take the offensive, just like your lion-hearted forebears."
They know your Grace hath cause and means and might; So hath your Highness. Never king of England Whose hearts have left their bodies here in England And lie pavilioned in the fields of France.,"They know your Grace has justification, as well as the money and military strength. And so you do. No king of England was ever backed by wealthier nobles or more loyal subjects. Their bodies may remain here in England, but their hearts are encamped on the fields of France already."
"Oh, let their bodies follow, my dear liege, With blood and sword and fire to win your right, Will raise your Highness such a mighty sum As never did the clergy at one time Bring in to any of your ancestors.","Oh, let their bodies follow, my dear king, to win back what’s rightfully yours with blood and sword and fire. And to that end, we, the clergy, will raise your Highness a sum greater than your ancestors were ever given at any one time."
"We must not only arm t' invade the French, Against the Scot, who will make road upon us With all advantages.","We must not only arm ourselves to invade France, but must also apportion troops to defend against invasion by the Scots, who will see this as a perfect opportunity to attack."
"They of those marches, gracious sovereign, Shall be a wall sufficient to defend","Your subjects in the north, gracious sovereign, will provide a wall of defense against Scottish thieves across the border."
"We do not mean the coursing snatchers only, But fear the main intendment of the Scot, Who hath been still a giddy neighbor to us. For you shall read that my great-grandfather But that the Scot on his unfurnished kingdom Came pouring like the tide into a breach With ample and brim fullness of his force, Galling the gleanèd land with hot assays, That England, being empty of defense, Hath shook and trembled at th' ill neighborhood.","I don’t mean merely bands of thieves. What we have to worry about is a full-scale invasion from Scotland—always an unreliable neighbor. You’ll find that my great-grandfather never went to war with France without Scotland making an attack on his undefended kingdom, pouring in full force like the tide through a gap in a dyke, troubling the depleted country with violent attacks, and laying siege to towns and castles. The whole of England, being unprotected, trembled with fear."
"She hath been then more feared than harmed, my liege, For hear her but exampled by herself: And she a mourning widow of her nobles, She hath herself not only well defended But taken and impounded as a stray The king of Scots, whom she did send to France And make her chronicle as rich with praise As is the ooze and bottom of the sea With sunken wrack and sumless treasuries.","But the country was more frightened than hurt, my liege. Take this example: when all its knights have been in France and all its noblemen absent, England has not only defended itself well, but actually seized the Scottish king and penned him up like a stray dog. Then he was sent off to France. He enhanced King Edward’s fame, adding royalty to his captives and thus making England’s own history as rich with glory as the muddy floor of the sea is rich with sunken ships and innumerable treasures."
"But there’s a saying very old and true: Then with Scotland first begin.” For once the eagle England being in prey, To her unguarded nest the weasel Scot Comes sneaking and so sucks her princely eggs, To ’tame and havoc more than she can eat.","But here’s an old, true saying: “If you want to win France, start with Scotland.” For when the eagle England leaves her nest to seek prey, the weasel Scot always comes sneaking around to suck dry her princely eggs and, like the mouse when the cat’s away, destroy more than she can actually eat."
"It follows, then, the cat must stay at home. Yet that is but a crushed necessity, Since we have locks to safeguard necessaries While that the armèd hand doth fight abroad, Th' advisèd head defends itself at home. For government, though high and low and lower, Put into parts, doth keep in one consent, Like music.","It would follow from this that the cat should stay home. But that is a false conclusion, since we have locks to keep our valuables safe and clever traps to catch little thieves. While the armed hand fights in foreign lands, the wise head defends itself at home. For though the state is divided into different levels and functions, it all works in agreement for a unified purpose, a natural and perfect end such as we find in music."
"Therefore doth heaven divide The state of man in diverse functions, Setting endeavor in continual motion, To which is fixèd as an aim or butt Creatures that by a rule in nature teach The act of order to a peopled kingdom. They have a king and officers of sorts, Where some like magistrates correct at home, Others like soldiers armèd in their stings Make boot upon the summer’s velvet buds, Which pillage they with merry march bring home To the tent royal of their emperor, The singing masons building roofs of gold, The civil citizens kneading up the honey, The poor mechanic porters crowding in Their heavy burdens at his narrow gate, Delivering o'er to executors pale The lazy yawning drone. I this infer: That many things, having full reference To one consent, may work contrariously, Come to one mark, as many ways meet in one town, As many fresh streams meet in one salt sea, As many lines close in the dial’s center, So may a thousand actions, once afoot, Without defeat. Therefore to France, my liege! Divide your happy England into four, Whereof take you one quarter into France, And you withal shall make all Gallia shake.","That is why God divided humanity into various functions, so as to keep human endeavor moving ever forward, the one single fixed element—the aim—being obedience. Honey bees operate in just such a communal way. In fact, you can learn a lot about how to run a well-ordered kingdom from these creatures. They have a king and officers of sorts. Some, like magistrates, dole out punishment at home, while others venture forth for commerce, like merchants. Still others, armed like soldiers with stingers, pillage the summer flowers, bringing the booty triumphantly home to the royal tent of their emperor, who is preoccupied with governing. The emperor supervises the masons as they build gold roofs, the ordinary citizens as they process the honey, the humble laborers as they crowd through the city’s narrow gate with their heavy burdens, and the solemn-looking judge (with his grouchy hum) as he delivers lazy, unproductive drones to pale executioners. From this, I conclude that many different elements can work toward one common end—just as many arrows, shot from different points, converge on a single target; just as many roads meet in a single town; just as many fresh streams empty into only one salt sea; just as the many radiuses of a sundial A sundial is a device that tells time, with a straight edge casting a shadow on a flat metal plate. sundial unite at its center. Just so, a thousand actions, once set in motion, will result in one desired object, and all will be well carried out and have a successful end. Therefore, head to France, my liege! Divide your lucky England into four. If you take even one quarter with you to France, you will nevertheless make the whole country shake."
"Cannot defend our own doors from the dog, Let us be worried, and our nation lose The name of hardiness and policy.","If we cannot defend our country with three times such a power left at home, then we deserve to be harassed by an invader and lose our reputation as a powerful and politically savvy nation."
Call in the messengers sent from the Dauphin.,Call in the messengers sent from the Dauphin.
"And yours, the noble sinews of our power, France being ours, we’ll bend it to our awe Or break it all to pieces. Or there we’ll sit, Ruling in large and ample empery Or lay these bones in an unworthy urn, Tombless, with no remembrance over them. Either our history shall with full mouth Speak freely of our acts, or else our grave, Not worshipped with a waxen epitaph.","Now I’ve made up my mind, and with God’s help—and yours, you nobles who are the mainstay of my power—I’ll force France to fear me, or I’ll break her into pieces, as she’s rightfully mine. Either I’ll sit, ruling with absolute authority over France and all her dukedoms, or I’ll lay these bones in a common grave, with no stone or inscription over them. Either the story of my deeds will be declaimed loudly and without restraint, or else my grave will remain speechless, like a Turkish mute, not honored with even an epitaph etched in wax."
"Now are we well prepared to know the pleasure Of our fair cousin Dauphin, for we hear Your greeting is from him, not from the king.","I’m ready now to hear what my good cousin the Dauphin has to say—for I hear that the greeting you bear is from him, not the king."
"Freely to render what we have in charge, Or shall we sparingly show you far off The Dauphin’s meaning and our embassy?",Will your Majesty grant us permission to freely express the message we’ve been asked to convey? Or should we be tactful and only hint at what the Dauphin sent us to say?
"We are no tyrant, but a Christian king, As is our wretches fettered in our prisons. Therefore with frank and with uncurbèd plainness Tell us the Dauphin’s mind.","I am no tyrant but a Christian king, whose emotions are as tightly controlled as the wretches who languish in our prisons. Therefore tell me the Dauphin’s mind frankly and without constraint."
"Thus, then, in few: Did claim some certain dukedoms in the right Of your great predecessor, King Edward the Third; In answer of which claim, the prince our master Says that you savor too much of your youth That can be with a nimble galliard won. You cannot revel into dukedoms there. He therefore sends you, meeter for your spirit, This tun of treasure, and, in lieu of this, Hear no more of you. This the Dauphin speaks.","Here it is then, in as few words as possible. Your Highness recently sent word to France claiming certain dukedoms as your own, in the name of your great ancestor, King Edward the Third. By way of answer, the prince our master says that you’re acting like the immature youth that you are. He warns you to take note: there’s nothing in France that you can win by dancing. You can’t party your way into dukedoms there. He therefore sends you this casket of treasure as a gift more suited to your character. And in return for this gift, he wishes you to drop your claim to the dukedoms. This is the Dauphin’s message."
"What treasure, uncle?","What’s the treasure, uncle?"
"Tennis balls, my liege.","Tennis balls, my liege."
"His present and your pains we thank you for. When we have matched our rackets to these balls, We will in France, by God’s grace, play a set Shall strike his father’s crown into the hazard. That all the courts of France will be disturbed With chases. And we understand him well, How he comes o'er us with our wilder days, Not measuring what use we made of them.","I’m happy the Dauphin has such a good sense of humor. Thank you for his present and your trouble. Once I’ve put my rackets to these balls, I’ll play a set in France, God willing, that will knock his father’s crown right out of the court. Tell him he’s got himself such a willing opponent that we’ll be chasing balls all over France. And I understand perfectly his sneering reference to my wilder days. He doesn’t realize how useful they were to me. For a long time, I didn’t value this humble throne of England, and therefore lived at some remove and gave myself over to riotous living. Men tend to be at their most irresponsible when they’re away from home. But tell the Dauphin I will retain the dignity of kingship and appear all the more royal and glorious on the throne of France. Precisely for this purpose I went about like a commoner and experienced the life of the ordinary man. Now I’ll rise there with"
"And therefore, living hence, did give ourself To barbarous license, as ’tis ever common That men are merriest when they are from home. But tell the Dauphin I will keep my state, When I do rouse me in my throne of France, For that I have laid by my majesty And plodded like a man for working days. But I will rise there with so full a glory Yea, strike the Dauphin blind to look on us. And tell the pleasant prince this mock of his Hath turned his balls to gun-stones, and his soul Shall stand sore chargèd for the wasteful vengeance Shall this his mock mock out of their dear husbands, Mock mothers from their sons, mock castles down, And some are yet ungotten and unborn That shall have cause to curse the Dauphin’s scorn. To whom I do appeal, and in whose name Tell you the Dauphin I am coming on, To venge me as I may and to put forth My rightful hand in a well-hallowed cause. His jest will savor but of shallow wit When thousands weep more than did laugh at it. —Convey them with safe conduct.—Fare you well.","such glory that I’ll dazzle all the eyes of France. I’ll shine so brightly that even the Dauphin will be 								struck blind. And tell the laughing prince that this joke of his has transformed his tennis balls into cannon 								balls, and the destructive vengeance they bring with them will be his responsibility. His mocking will mock 								many thousands of widows out of their husbands. It will mock mothers out of their sons, and mock castles down. 								There are people yet unborn and unconceived who will have reason to curse the Dauphin’s scorn. But all this 								lies with God, to whom I do appeal. In God’s name, inform the Dauphin I am coming, to avenge myself and to put 								forth my rightful hand in a sanctified cause. So go in peace. And tell the Dauphin his joke will look pretty 								stupid when thousands more weep than ever laughed at it. (to attendants) Give them safe conduct.—Farewell."
This was a merry message.,That was a humorous message.
"We hope to make the sender blush at it. That may give furth'rance to our expedition; For we have now no thought in us but France, Save those to God, that run before our business. Therefore let our proportions for these wars That may with reasonable swiftness add More feathers to our wings. For, God before, We’ll chide this Dauphin at his father’s door. Therefore let every man now task his thought,","I hope to make the sender blush for it. Now, lords, don’t let slip any opportunity that might be advantageous for our expedition. My thoughts are now bent entirely on France—except my thoughts about God, who takes precedence over this undertaking. Therefore, let’s set about mustering the requisite number of troops and give consideration to anything that can be expected to speed our enterprise. For, with God on our side, we’ll chastise this prince on his father’s own doorstep. Therefore, let every man give some thought to how this noble expedition may be undertaken."
"Now all the youth of England are on fire, And silken dalliance in the wardrobe lies. Now thrive the armorers, and honor’s thought Reigns solely in the breast of every man. Following the mirror of all Christian kings With wingèd heels, as English Mercurys. For now sits Expectation in the air And hides a sword, from hilts unto the point, Promised to Harry and his followers. The French, advised by good intelligence Of this most dreadful preparation, Shake in their fear, and with pale policy O England, model to thy inward greatness, Like little body with a mighty heart, What might’st thou do, that honor would thee do, Were all thy children kind and natural! A nest of hollow bosoms, which he fills With treacherous crowns, and three corrupted men— One, Richard, Earl of Cambridge, and the second, Henry, Lord Scroop of Masham, and the third, Have, for the gilt of France (Oh, guilt indeed!), Confirmed conspiracy with fearful France, And by their hands this grace of kings must die, If hell and treason hold their promises,","Now all the young men of England are inspired and have stored their party clothes in the closet. Armorers are doing great business, and all men think about is honor. People are selling off their land to buy warhorses so they can follow the exemplary king into battle as if they had winged feet, like Mercury In Roman mythology, Mercury is the messenger of the gods, often de picted with winged feet. Mercury . There’s a sense of anticipation in the air. In the minds of Harry and his followers, visions of the kingdoms, spoils, and titles to be won eclipse thoughts of actual fighting. The French, meanwhile, have been forewarned of all this preparation by their spies and tremble in fear. They seek to derail the English with cowardly tricks. Oh, England! You are physically small but inwardly great, like a mighty heart enclosed in a small body. There is nothing you couldn’t accomplish if all your subjects were loyal and loving! But, see, the king of France has detected your weak spot: a nest of faithless traitors, whose treachery he has purchased with gold. Three corrupt men—Richard, earl of Cambridge; Henry, Lord Scroop of Masham; and Sir Thomas Grey, knight, of Northumberland—have agreed to conspire with the French in exchange for money. The gracious king will die by their hands in Southampton before he sets sail for France—if Hell and treason have their way. Stick with us, ladies and gentlemen, and we’ll make a play, conquering space and time. Imagine that the traitors have been paid and made their choice. The king has left London, and the scene now"
"Linger your patience on, and we’ll digest Th' abuse of distance, force a play. The sum is paid, the traitors are agreed, The king is set from London, and the scene There is the playhouse now, there must you sit, And thence to France shall we convey you safe And bring you back, charming the narrow seas To give you gentle pass; for, if we may, But, till the king come forth, and not till then, Unto Southampton do we shift our scene.","shifts, friends, to Southampton. That’s where you must pretend the theater is; that’s where you must sit. From there we’ll safely carry you to France and back, calming the waters of the Channel to provide you with a smooth voyage. For if we can help it, we’d just as soon nobody was made sick by our play. But we won’t shift the scene to Southampton until Henry reappears."
"Well met, Corporal Nym.","Good to see you, Corporal Nym."
"Good morrow, Lieutenant Bardolph.","Good day, Lieutenant Bardolph."
"What, are Ancient Pistol and you friends yet?","Tell me, are you and Ensign Pistol friends again yet?"
"For my part, I care not. I say little, but when time shall serve, there shall be smiles; but that shall be as it may. I dare not fight, but I will wink and hold out mine iron. It is a simple one, but what though? It will toast cheese, and it will endure cold as another man’s sword will, and there’s an end.","For my part, I really don’t care. I don’t say much, but when the time comes, we’ll smile at each other. But that’s as it may be. I won’t fight, but I can close my eyes and take a swipe with my sword—just a simple sword, but so what? It’s good enough to toast cheese, and it will survive cold as well as another man’s sword. And that’s that."
"I will bestow a breakfast to make you friends; and we’ll be all three sworn brothers to France. Let ’t be so, good Corporal Nym.","I’ll buy you both breakfast if it will make you two friends. Then we can all three be comrades on our way to France. How about it, Corporal Nym?"
"Faith, I will live so long as I may, that’s the certain of it. And when I cannot live any longer, I will do as I may. That is my rest; that is the rendezvous of it.","Well, I will live until I die, that’s for sure, and when I can’t live anymore, I’ll deal with it. That’s it. That’s really all I can say."
"It is certain, corporal, that he is married to Nell Quickly, and certainly she did you wrong, for you were troth-plight to her.","It’s true, corporal, that he is married to Nell Quickly. And it’s true that she did you wrong, since you were engaged to her."
"I cannot tell. Things must be as they may. Men may sleep, and they may have their throats about them at that time, and some say knives have edges. It must be as it may. Though patience be a tired mare, yet she will plod. There must be conclusions. Well, I cannot tell.","It’s not for me to say. Things are what they are. Men may sleep, and when they do they may have their throats with them, and some people say knives have blades. What must be must be, and though my patience is worn out, it will last a little longer. There must be some resolution. Well, it’s not for me to say."
"Here comes Ancient Pistol and his wife. Good corporal, be patient here.—How now, mine host Pistol?","Here comes Ensign Pistol and his wife. Be cool now, corporal.—How are you, Pistol, my good host?"
"Now, by this hand, I swear, I scorn the term, Nor shall my Nell keep lodgers.","You peasant dog, are you calling me a host? I swear, I scorn the word. My Nell isn’t going to be taking any lodgers."
"No, by my troth, not long, for we cannot lodge and board a dozen or fourteen gentlewomen that live honestly by the prick of their needles but it will be thought we keep a bawdy house straight.","No, not for long, that’s certain. For we couldn’t even put up a dozen or so nice girls who make an honest living sewing without our neighbors thinking we were running a brothel."
"Oh, well-a-day, Lady! If he be not hewn now, we shall see willful adultery and murder committed.","Oh, dear. If he isn’t cut down in his tracks right now, we’ll see willful adultery and murder “Willful adultery and murder” is an example of the humorous nonsense Mistress Quickly speaks. willful adultery and murder committed."
"Good lieutenant, good corporal, offer nothing here.","Good lieutenant, good corporal, don’t fight each other here."
Pish!,Pish!
"Pish for thee, Iceland dog, Thou prick-eared cur of Iceland!","Pish to you, you mangy dog, you pointy-eared Icelandic mutt."
"Good Corporal Nym, show thy valor and put up your sword.","Corporal Nym, be a man and put away your sword."
Will you shog off? (to PISTOL) I would have you solus.,"Get lost, will you? (to PISTOL) I’d like to get you solus Solus means “alone” in Latin. solus ."
"“Solus,” egregious dog? O viper vile, The solus in thy most marvelous face, The solus in thy teeth and in thy throat And in thy hateful lungs, yea, in thy maw, perdy, I do retort the solus in thy bowels, For I can take, and Pistol’s cock is up, And flashing fire will follow.","Solus, you unspeakable dog? You loathsome snake, I throw your solus in that weird face of yours, in your teeth and your throat and in your hateful lungs, and even worse, in your nasty mouth! Shove that solus into your bowels, because I can take you. My gun is cocked and ready to fire."
"I am not Barbason; you cannot conjure me. I have an humor to knock you indifferently well. If you grow foul with me, Pistol, I will scour you with my rapier, as I may, in fair terms. If you would walk off, I would prick your guts a little in good terms, as I may, and that’s the humor of it.","I am not some fiend of hell: you can’t get rid of me with spells. I’m in a mood to beat you up pretty good. If you get nasty with me, Pistol, I’ll stab you with my sword, in fair play. If you’d like to step aside with me, I’ll give you a little prick in the guts, all in fair play, if I can, and that’s the way it is."
"O braggart vile and damnèd furious wight, Therefore exhale.","You revolting braggart and hellish creature! Your grave is gaping open, and your death is near. So take your last breath."
"Hear me, hear me what I say: he that strikes the first stroke, I’ll run him up to the hilts, as I am a soldier. (draws)","Listen, listen to what I say: whoever strikes first, I’ll run him through with my sword, as sure as I’m a soldier. (drawing his sword)"
"An oath of mickle might, and fury shall abate. Thy spirits are most tall.","That’s an oath of great power, and our fury must subside. ( PISTOL and NYM sheath their swords) Give me your hand—your forefoot. You have a brave spirit."
"I will cut thy throat one time or other in fair terms, that is the humor of it.","I’ll cut your throat, sooner or later—that’s just how it is."
"Couple à gorge, that is the word. I defy thee again. No, to the spital go, And from the powd'ring tub of infamy Fetch forth the lazar kite of Cressid’s kind, Doll Tearsheet she by name, and her espouse.","Couple à gorge “Couple à gorge” is corrupt French for “cut the throat.” Couple à gorge is the word for what you’re trying to say. I defy you again. You dog, do you think you’ll take my wife? No, go to the hospital, into the ward where they treat venereal disease, and get yourself a leprous, diseased prostitute like Doll Tearsheet and marry her."
"For the only she, And—pauca—there’s enough. Go to.","I won the former Mistress Quickly and I’ll keep her as my only wife, and—Damn it! That’s enough. Come on!"
"Mine host Pistol, you must come to my master and your hostess. He is very sick and would to bed.—Good Bardolph, put thy face between his sheets, and do the office of a warming-pan. Faith, he’s very ill.","My host Pistol, you must come to my master. You too, my hostess: he is very sick and should be put to bed. Bardolph, put your face between his sheets and act as a warming pan In Shakespeare’s Henry IV plays, Bardolph’s face is described as flam ing red with acne. warming pan . Really, he’s very sick!"
"Away, you rogue!","Get out of here, you punk!"
"By my troth, he’ll yield the crow a pudding one of these days. The king has killed his heart. Good husband, come home presently.","I swear, he’ll be food for the crows soon. The king has broken his heart. Good husband, come home soon."
"Come, shall I make you two friends? We must to France together. Why the devil should we keep knives to cut one another’s throats?","Come on, can I get you two to make up? We have to go to France together: why should we cut each other’s throats?"
Let floods o'erswell and fiends for food howl on!,Let rivers flood and fiends howl for food!
You’ll pay me the eight shillings I won of you at betting?,Are you going to pay the eight shillings I won from you in a bet?
Base is the slave that pays.,Paying debts is for peasants.
That now I will have—that’s the humor of it.,I’m going to take it from you now. That’s how it is.
As manhood shall compound. Push home.,"We’ll see, won’t we? Do your best."
"By this sword, he that makes the first thrust, I’ll kill him. By this sword, I will.","By this sword, I’ll kill whichever one of you makes the first thrust. By this sword, I will."
"“Sword” is an oath, and oaths must have their course.","“By this sword” is an oath, and oaths must be kept."
"Corporal Nym, an thou wilt be friends, be friends; an thou wilt not, why then be enemies with me too. Prithee, put up.","Corporal Nym, if you want to be friends, be friends. If not, then you can be my enemy, too. Come on, put it away."
"A noble shalt thou have, and present pay, And liquor likewise will I give to thee, I’ll live by Nym, and Nym shall live by me. Is not this just? For I shall subtler be Unto the camp, and profits will accrue. Give me thy hand.","I’ll give you a noble A noble is a coin worth slightly less than the eight shil lings he owes Nym. noble right now, and I’ll give you liquor, too, and friendship and brotherhood. I’ll live for Nym, and Nym will live for me. Is that fair? For I’ll be selling provisions to the troops, and there’ll be profits to go around. Give me your hand."
I shall have my noble?,I’ll get my noble?
"In cash, most justly paid.",In cash.
"Well, then, that’s the humor of ’t.","Well, then, that’s how it is."
"As ever you come of women, come in quickly to Sir John. Ah, poor heart, he is so shaked of a burning quotidian tertian that it is most lamentable to behold. Sweet men, come to him.","If you ever had a mother, come in quickly to Sir John. The poor thing, he is so shaken with a fever that it’s terrible to see. Sweet men, come to him."
"The king hath run bad humors on the knight, that’s the even of it.",The king has done him a bad turn. That’s all there is to it.
"Nym, thou hast spoke the right.","Nym, what you say is true. His heart is broken and corroborate “Corroborate” means “strengthened” or “confirmed” and is probably not what Pistol means. corroborate ."
"The king is a good king, but it must be as it may. He passes some humors and careers.","The king is a good king, but things must be as they may. He has his moods and his ways."
"Let us condole the knight, for, lambkins, we will live.","Let us go sit with the knight; for, my little lambs, we will survive him."
"'Fore God, his grace is bold to trust these traitors.","I must say, the king is taking a bold risk letting these traitors go free."
They shall be apprehended by and by.,They’ll be arrested in a little while.
"How smooth and even they do bear themselves, As if allegiance in their bosoms sat",How smooth and cool they seem! Just as if they were perfectly loyal and faithful.
"The king hath note of all that they intend, By interception which they dream not of.","The king has been informed of all their plans, but they have no idea."
"Nay, but the man that was his bedfellow, Whom he hath dulled and cloyed with gracious favors— His sovereign’s life to death and treachery!","No, but it’s unbelievable that the man who was his dearest friend, a man he has showered with love and favor, would repay the king with treachery, selling his own sovereign’s life to a foreign power!"
"Now sits the wind fair, and we will aboard. —My Lord of Cambridge, and my kind Lord of Masham, And you, my gentle knight, give me your thoughts. Will cut their passage through the force of France, Doing the execution and the act For which we have in head assembled them?","Now that the wind is favorable, let’s board the ship. —My Lord of Cambridge and my good Lord of Masham and you, my noble knight, what do you think? Will our army cut a swath through the fighting force of France, achieving and accomplishing everything I’ve assembled them to do?"
"No doubt, my liege, if each man do his best.","No doubt it will, my liege, if each man does his best."
"We carry not a heart with us from hence That grows not in a fair consent with ours, Nor leave not one behind that doth not wish Success and conquest to attend on us.","I have no doubt about that, since I know there isn’t a man among us who isn’t with me wholeheartedly, or a soul left behind who doesn’t wish us success and conquest."
"Than is your Majesty. There’s not, I think, a subject That sits in heart-grief and uneasiness Under the sweet shade of your government.","There never was a monarch better feared and loved than yourself, your Majesty. I don’t think there’s a single unhappy subject living under the protection of your government."
True. Those that were your father’s enemies With hearts create of duty and of zeal.,"True. Those who were bitter enemies of your father in his time have turned their bitterness to sweetness, serving you loyally and wholeheartedly."
We therefore have great cause of thankfulness And shall forget the office of our hand Sooner than quittance of desert and merit,"Yes, I have great cause to be thankful. I’m more likely to forget how to use my own hand than how to reward virtue and merit as they deserve."
"So service shall with steelèd sinews toil, And labor shall refresh itself with hope To do your Grace incessant services.","And so your subjects serve you all the more energetically, hopeful of success and reward."
"We judge no less.—Uncle of Exeter, That railed against our person. We consider It was excess of wine that set him on, And on his more advice we pardon him.","I expect no less. Uncle of Exeter, release the man who was arrested yesterday for railing against me. I believe he only did it because he drank too much, and now that he’s had a chance to think about his actions, I can pardon him."
"That’s mercy, but too much security. Breed, by his sufferance, more of such a kind.","That’s merciful but a bit careless. He should be punished, your Majesty. If we tolerate such behavior, we’re in danger of encouraging it."
"Oh, let us yet be merciful.","Oh, let us be merciful anyway."
"So may Your Highness, and yet punish, too.",Your Highness could be merciful but still punish.
"Sir, you show great mercy if you give him life","Sir, it would be merciful to let him live after beating him severely."
"Alas, your too much love and care of me Are heavy orisons 'gainst this poor wretch. If little faults proceeding on distemper Shall not be winked at, how shall we stretch our eye Appear before us? We’ll yet enlarge that man, Though Cambridge, Scroop, and Grey, in their dear care And tender preservation of our person, Would have him punished. And now to our French causes.","I’m afraid your great love and concern for me lead you to deal too harshly with this poor fellow. If minor lapses caused by drunkenness are not to be tolerated, how will we punish capital crimes that result from much planning and forethought? No, I’ll have that man released, despite the fact that Cambridge, Scroop, and Grey, in their extreme concern for my safety, would prefer that he were punished. And now, let’s turn to our business with the French. Who are the new commissioners?"
"I one, my lord. Your Highness bade me ask for it today.","I am one, my lord. Your Highness told me to ask for my commission today."
"So did you me, my liege.","You told me to do the same, my liege."
"And I, my royal sovereign.","And me, too, my royal sovereign."
"—There yours, Lord Scroop of Masham. —And, sir knight, Grey of Northumberland, this same is yours. (gives each of them a paper) —Read them, and know I know your worthiness. We will aboard tonight.—Why, how now, gentlemen? What see you in those papers, that you lose So much complexion?—Look you, how they change. Their cheeks are paper.—Why, what read you there Out of appearance?","In that case, there is yours, Richard Earl of Cambridge; there yours, Lord Scroop of Masham; and, sir knight, Grey of Northumberland, this one is yours. (he gives each of them a piece of paper) Read them, and trust that I recognize your true worth. My Lord of Westmoreland, and uncle Exeter, we will set sail night.—Why, what’s this, gentlemen! What’s in those papers that makes you change color?—Look how pale they’re turning! Their cheeks are like paper.—What are you reading that makes you turn white?"
"I do confess my fault, And do submit me to Your Highness' mercy.",I confess my crime and throw myself on your Highness’s mercy.
To which we all appeal.,To which we all appeal.
"By your own counsel is suppressed and killed. You must not dare, for shame, to talk of mercy, For your own reasons turn into your bosoms, As dogs upon their masters, worrying you. These English monsters. My Lord of Cambridge here, You know how apt our love was to accord To furnish him with all appurtenants Belonging to his honor, and this man And sworn unto the practices of France, To kill us here in Hampton; to the which This knight, no less for bounty bound to us Than Cambridge is, hath likewise sworn.—But Oh, Ingrateful, savage, and inhuman creature? Thou that didst bear the key of all my counsels, That knew’st the very bottom of my soul, That almost mightst have coined me into gold, May it be possible that foreign hire Could out of thee extract one spark of evil That might annoy my finger? 'Tis so strange That, though the truth of it stands off as gross Treason and murder ever kept together As two yoke-devils sworn to either’s purpose, Working so grossly in a natural cause That admiration did not whoop at them.","The mercy that was alive in me a moment ago was smothered and killed by your own advice. For shame, don’t talk of mercy. Your own arguments turn against you, like dogs who bite their own masters.—Princes and noble peers, take a look at these English monsters. Cambridge here, you know how I favored him and treated him with every respect due his rank. He was bought for a few coins, entering easily into this conspiracy with the French, promising to kill me here in Southhampton. And this knight, whom I’ve treated as generously as I have Cambridge, also joined the plot. But, oh, what can I say to you, Lord Scroop? You cruel, ungrateful, savage, and inhuman creature! You who had access to all my thoughts, who knew me to the inmost part of my soul, who could have had any amount of gold from me if you’d needed it and only asked me: is it possible that a foreign power could find in you even enough evil to injure one of my fingers? Though the truth of your treachery is as plain as black on white, I can scarcely believe it, it’s so past understanding. Treason and murder have always gone together, like two devils joined in a common purpose. That’s natural. But you, against all reason, added something new to the equation. You added the sheer improbability that you could do this. Whatever fiend it was that seduced you must win the prize for excellence in hell. All other devils who tempt people to treason patch together some motive, put together from shreds"
"Wonder to wait on treason and on murder, And whatsoever cunning fiend it was That wrought upon thee so preposterously Hath got the voice in hell for excellence. Do botch and bungle up damnation With patches, colors, and with forms being fetched From glist'ring semblances of piety. But he that tempered thee bade thee stand up, Unless to dub thee with the name of traitor. If that same demon that hath gulled thee thus Should with his lion gait walk the whole world, He might return to vasty Tartar back A soul so easy as that Englishman’s.” Oh, how hast thou with jealousy infected The sweetness of affiance! Show men dutiful? Why, so didst thou. Seem they grave and learnèd? Why, so didst thou. Seem they religious? Why, so didst thou. Or are they spare in diet, Free from gross passion or of mirth or anger, Constant in spirit, not swerving with the blood, Not working with the eye without the ear, And but in purgèd judgment trusting neither? Such and so finely bolted didst thou seem. And thus thy fall hath left a kind of blot With some suspicion. I will weep for thee, For this revolt of thine methinks is like Another fall of man.—Their faults are open. Arrest them to the answer of the law,","and patches of righteousness. But the devil that tempted you gave you no reason why you should commit treason other than to win the name of traitor. The demon who seduced you could stride the world over with the proud gait of a lion, could return to hell and tell the devil’s legions, “I will never win another soul as easily as I won that Englishman’s.” How you have poisoned my faith in people! Now I am suspicious of everyone. Are there men who appear dutiful? Why, so did you. Are there those who seem serious and knowledgeable? Why, so did you. Do they come from good families? Why, so did you. Do they seem religious? Why, so did you. Do they live in moderation, free from excessive emotion—stable rather than changing their minds constantly—tastefully dressed, not merely seeing but also listening, and trusting no impression without confirmation? That’s how sound a man you appeared. Your fall has left a blot that opens even the best and brightest to suspicion. You have broken my heart. This treachery of yours is like the second Fall of man “Fall of man” refers to Adam and Eve’s first sin—eating the fruit of the Tree of Knowledge, which caused them to lose their innocence and be expelled from Eden. Fall of man .—Their crimes are revealed. Arrest and punish them according to the law, and may God pardon them for what they would have done."
"I arrest thee of high treason, by the name of Richard, Earl of Cambridge. —I arrest thee of high treason, by the name of Henry, Lord Scroop of Masham. Thomas Grey, knight, of Northumberland.","Richard Earl of Cambridge, I arrest you for high treason. Henry Lord Scroop of Masham, I arrest you for high treason. Thomas Grey, knight, of Northumberland, I arrest you for high treason."
"Our purposes God justly hath discovered, And I repent my fault more than my death, Which I beseech Your Highness to forgive,","A just God has discovered our plot. I regret my crime more than my death, and I beg your Highness to forgive me, while punishing my body with death."
"For me, the gold of France did not seduce, Although I did admit it as a motive The sooner to effect what I intended; But God be thankèd for prevention, Beseeching God and you to pardon me.","For my part, I didn’t do it for the money, though I admit the money encouraged me to do what I was planning sooner. But I thank God that I failed in my scheme, and I rejoice in paying the penalty, as I beg God and you to pardon me."
"Never did faithful subject more rejoice At the discovery of most dangerous treason Than I do at this hour joy o'er myself, My fault, but not my body, pardon, sovereign.","No faithful subject ever rejoiced more at the discovery of most dangerous treason than I now rejoice that I was thwarted in a damnable undertaking. Pardon my crime, sovereign, but not my person."
"God quit you in His mercy. Hear your sentence: You have conspired against our royal person, Joined with an enemy proclaimed, and from his coffers Wherein you would have sold your king to slaughter, His princes and his peers to servitude, His subjects to oppression and contempt, And his whole kingdom into desolation. But we our kingdom’s safety must so tender, Whose ruin you have sought, that to her laws We do deliver you. Get you therefore hence, Poor miserable wretches, to your death, You patience to endure, and true repentance Of all your dear offences.—Bear them hence.","May God in His mercy forgive you. This is your sentence. You have conspired against us with a proclaimed enemy and accepted his money in exchange for killing us. In doing so, you would have sold your king to slaughter, his princes and lords to slavery, his subjects to oppression and abuse, and his whole kingdom to ruin. I seek no revenge for myself, but so dearly do I hold the safety of my kingdom, which you sought to destroy, that you must be punished according to her laws. So go to your deaths, poor miserable wretches, the pain of which may merciful God give you the strength to endure. And may you truly regret your terrible crimes. Take them away."
"Now, lords, for France, the enterprise whereof Shall be to you as us, like glorious. Since God so graciously hath brought to light This dangerous treason lurking in our way To hinder our beginnings. We doubt not now But every rub is smoothèd on our way. Our puissance into the hand of God, Putting it straight in expedition. Cheerly to sea. The signs of war advance. No king of England if not king of France.","And now, my lords, off to France. This invasion will be as glorious to you as it is to me. I have no doubt that it will be a swift and successful war, since God so graciously exposed this dangerous plot. I’m now sure that every bump in the road has been removed. Let’s go forth, dear countrymen. Our strength is God. Let’s get going. We’re off to sea, banners flying. I’ll be no king of England if I’m not also king of France."
"Prithee, honey-sweet husband, let me bring thee to Staines.","Please, sweet husband, let me come with you as far as the town of Staines."
"No; for my manly heart doth earn.—Bardolph, be blithe.— Nym, rouse thy vaunting veins.—Boy, bristle thy courage up. For Falstaff, he is dead, and we must earn therefore.","No, because my manly heart is grieving. Bardolph, be happy.—Nym, rouse your bragging spirits.—Boy, be brave. Falstaff is dead, and we must mourn him."
"Would I were with him, wheresome'er he is, either in heaven or in hell.","I wish I were with him, wherever he is—in heaven or in hell."
"Nay, sure, he’s not in hell! He’s in Arthur’s bosom, if ever man went to Arthur’s bosom. He made a finer end, and went away an it had been any christom child. He parted ev'n just between twelve and one, ev'n at the turning o' th' tide; for after I saw him fumble with the sheets and play with flowers and smile upon his finger’s end, I knew there was but one way, for his nose was as sharp as a pen, and he told of green fields. “How now, Sir John?” quoth I. “What, man, be o' good cheer!” So he cried out “God, God, God!” three or four times. Now I, to comfort him, bid him he should not think of God. I hoped there was no need to trouble himself with any such thoughts yet. So he bade me lay more clothes on his feet. I put my hand into the bed and felt them, and they were as cold as any stone. Then I felt to his knees, and so upward and upward, and all was as cold as any stone.","Oh, no, he’s surely not in hell. He’s in Arthur’s bosom The hostess means Abraham’s bosom, the proverbial resting place of good Christians, but has King Arthur on the brain. Arthur’s bosom , if any man ever went to Arthur’s bosom. He died as peacefully as a baby. He departed right between twelve and one, just as the tide was turning. For after I saw him fumbling with the sheets and playing with imaginary flowers and smiling at the ends of his fingers, I knew it was the end. His face was gaunt and he was babbling about green fields. “Now, now, Sir John!” I said. “What’s all this? Cheer up!” And he called out “God, God, God!” three or four times. To soothe him, I told him not to think of God, that I hoped it wasn’t yet time to bother with such thoughts. So he asked me to put more blankets on his feet. I put my hand into the bed and felt his feet, and they were stone-cold. Then I felt his legs, and they were stone-cold, and so I moved upward and upward, and his whole body was stone-cold."
They say he cried out of sack.,They say he cried out against sherry.
"Ay, that he did.","Yes, he did."
And of women.,And women.
"Nay, that he did not.","No, he did not."
"Yes, that he did, and said they were devils incarnate.","Yes, he did. He said they were devils incarnate."
'A could never abide carnation. 'Twas a color he never liked.,He could never bear carnation. It was a color he never did like.
He said once the devil would have him about women.,He once said the devil would get him because of women.
"He did in some sort, indeed, handle women, but then he was rheumatic, and talked of the Whore of Babylon.","He did touch on women a bit, but his body was aching with fever and he talked about the Whore of Babylon."
"Do you not remember he saw a flea stick upon Bardolph’s nose, and he said it was a black soul burning in hell?",Don’t you remember how he saw a flea land on Bardolph’s nose and said it was a black soul burning in hell?
"Well, the fuel is gone that maintained that fire. That’s all the riches I got in his service.","Well, the fuel The “fuel” Bardolph refers to is the drinks Falstaff bought him, which made his face even redder. fuel that sustained that fire is gone. That’s all the wealth I ever earned in his company."
Shall we shog? The King will be gone from Southampton.,Shall we get moving? The king will already have left Southampton.
"Come, let’s away.—My love, give me thy lips. Look to my chattels and my movables. Trust none, for oaths are straws, men’s faiths are wafer-cakes, And Holdfast is the only dog, my duck. Therefore, caveto be thy counselor. Go, clear thy crystals.—Yoke-fellows in arms, To suck, to suck, the very blood to suck.","Come, let’s be on our way. My love, let me kiss your lips. Look after my goods and possessions. Keep on your toes: the rule is “cash down, no credit.” Trust no one. For oaths are as easily broken as straws, and men’s faith crumbles like crackers, and you can only rely on what you can hold onto. Let caution be your guide. Go dry your eyes. Brothers in arms, we’re off to France—like leeches, my boys: to suck, to suck, their very blood to suck!"
"And that’s but unwholesome food, they say.",I’ve heard that’s not the most nourishing food.
"Touch her soft mouth, and march.","Kiss her soft mouth, and we’ll be off."
"Farewell, hostess. (kissing her)","Farewell, hostess. (kisses her)"
"I cannot kiss, that is the humor of it. But adieu.",I can’t kiss—that’s just how it is—but farewell.
"Let housewifery appear. Keep close, I thee command.","Be thrifty. And keep yourself hidden, I command you."
Farewell. Adieu.,Farewell. Adieu.
"Thus comes the English with full power upon us, And more than carefully it us concerns Therefore the Dukes of Berri and of Brittany, Of Brabant and of Orléans, shall make forth, And you, Prince Dauphin, with all swift dispatch, To line and new-repair our towns of war For England his approaches makes as fierce As waters to the sucking of a gulf. It fits us then to be as provident As fear may teach us out of late examples Upon our fields.","The English army is advancing on us at full strength. It is more important that we respond majestically than that we respond carefully. Therefore the dukes of Berri, Bretagne, Brabant, and Orléans shall advance, and you, Prince Dauphin, will swiftly entrench and fortify our fortress towns with men of courage and the means to defend themselves. The king of England’s approach is as forceful as a whirlpool. It is right for us to prepare like people who are afraid, as we’ve been taught by the recent lessons The king of France is referring to French defeats at Crécy (in ) and Poitiers (in ). recent lessons given us by the deadly and underestimated English on our own soil."
"To view the sick and feeble parts of France. And let us do it with no show of fear, No, with no more than if we heard that England For, my good liege, she is so idly kinged, Her scepter so fantastically borne By a vain, giddy, shallow, humorous youth, That fear attends her not. It is most meet we arm us 'gainst the foe, For peace itself should not so dull a kingdom, Though war nor no known quarrel were in question, But that defenses, musters, preparations, As were a war in expectation. Therefore I say ’tis meet we all go forth","My most feared father, it is certainly appropriate for us to arm ourselves against the enemy, because even in peace time, when no war or conflict is at hand, a kingdom should not lose its edge, but always be ready—with defenses, men, and training—as though it expected a war. Therefore, I agree that we should all go and inspect those French territories that are weak. Let’s do it with no show of anxiety—no, with no more fear than if we’d heard that the English were busying themselves with folk dancing. Because, my good king, England is so poorly led, her scepter so foolishly borne by a vain, silly, shallow, impulsive youth, that she’s hardly a threat."
"Oh peace, Prince Dauphin! You are too much mistaken in this king. With what great state he heard their embassy, How well supplied with noble counselors, How modest in exception, and withal How terrible in constant resolution, Were but the outside of the Roman Brutus, Covering discretion with a coat of folly, As gardeners do with ordure hide those roots That shall first spring and be most delicate.","Oh, please, Prince Dauphin! You are completely wrong about this king. Talk to the ambassadors who’ve just come back: ask them how majestically he responded to their message, how well supplied he was with good advisors, how restrained in expressing his displeasure, and, moreover, how terrifyingly firm he was in his resolve. You’ll discover that his youthful follies were like the persona that Lucius Junius Brutus In Roman history, a nobleman named Lucius Junius Brutus pretended to be feebleminded so King Tarquin wouldn’t recognize he was a threat. Lucius Junius Brutus adopted to deceive Tarquin—cloaking wisdom in folly the way gardeners cover the most delicate roots with manure when they first sprout up."
"But though we think it so, it is no matter. In cases of defense ’tis best to weigh The enemy more mighty than he seems. So the proportions of defense are filled, Doth, like a miser, spoil his coat with scanting A little cloth.","Well, you’re wrong, my Lord High Constable. But even if I thought you were right, it doesn’t matter. When it comes to defense, it’s best to assume that the enemy is more powerful than he seems. That way, we fill the gaps in our defenses. Otherwise, if we do it on the cheap, we’ll be like the miser who spoils his new coat by not buying quite enough cloth to make it."
"Think we King Harry strong, And, princes, look you strongly arm to meet him. And he is bred out of that bloody strain That haunted us in our familiar paths. Witness our too-much-memorable shame When Cressy battle fatally was struck Of that black name, Edward, Black Prince of Wales, Whiles that his mountain sire, on mountain standing","I think King Harry is strong, so the rest of you princes make sure to arm yourselves to meet him with strength. His ancestors got their first taste of blood in battle with us, and he is born of that warlike strain that haunted us on our home ground. Reflect on the battle of Crécy, where, to our everlasting shame, all our princes were taken prisoner by the Prince of Wales, he whom they called Edward the Black Prince. Remember how his mountain-bred father, standing high on a mountain,"
"Up in the air, crowned with the golden sun, Saw his heroical seed and smiled to see him The patterns that by God and by French fathers Had twenty years been made. This is a stem Of that victorious stock, and let us fear The native mightiness and fate of him.","crowned by the golden sun, observed his heroic son and smiled to see him mangle the work of nature, French youth whose fathers and God had nurtured for twenty years, since they were babies. This king is a branch of that same victorious stock. So let us be wary both of his inborn might and of his destiny."
Do crave admittance to your Majesty.,"Ambassadors of Harry, king of England, request a hearing with your Majesty."
"We’ll give them present audience. Go, and bring them.",We’ll see them immediately. Bring them right in.
"You see this chase is hotly followed, friends.","Notice, my friends, how closely this hunter follows his prey."
"Turn head and stop pursuit, for coward dogs Runs far before them. Good my sovereign, Take up the English short, and let them know Of what a monarchy you are the head. Self-love, my liege, is not so vile a sin","Turn and face them and you’ll stop the pursuit. The cowardly pack barks loudest when the quarry is way out front. My good King, surprise the English and let them know what kind of kingdom you rule over. Self-love, my liege, is not so great a sin as self-neglect."
From our brother England?,"From our brother monarch, the king of England?"
"From him, and thus he greets your Majesty: He wills you, in the name of God Almighty, That you divest yourself and lay apart","Yes, from him. Thus he greets your Majesty. He commands you, in the name of God: give up. Relinquish the stolen titles that, by the gift of heaven and the laws"
"By law of nature and of nations, 'longs To him and to his heirs—namely, the crown And all wide-stretchèd honors that pertain By custom and the ordinance of times 'Tis no sinister nor no awkward claim Picked from the wormholes of long-vanished days, Nor from the dust of old oblivion raked, He sends you this most memorable line, Willing you overlook this pedigree, And when you find him evenly derived From his most famed of famous ancestors, Edward the Third, he bids you then resign From him, the native and true challenger.","of nature and of nations, belong to him and his heirs. That is, give up the crown and all the extensive titles that go with it, according to custom and long use. So that you’ll know this is no dubious or farfetched claim, he sends you his family tree, every line of which supports the claim. Look over this document, and when you see that he is directly descended from his most famous of famous ancestors, Edward the Third, he demands that you resign your crown and kingdom, which you wrongfully hold at the expense of himself, the true and natural owner."
Or else what follows?,And what will happen if I don’t?
"Bloody constraint, for if you hide the crown Even in your hearts, there will he rake for it. In thunder and in earthquake like a Jove, That, if requiring fail, he will compel, And bids you, in the bowels of the Lord, Deliver up the crown and to take mercy Opens his vasty jaws, and on your head Turning the widows' tears, the orphans' cries, The dead men’s blood, the pining maidens' groans, For husbands, fathers, and betrothèd lovers, This is his claim, his threat'ning, and my message— Unless the Dauphin be in presence here, To whom expressly I bring greeting too.","Bloodshed will force you to. No matter how deeply you hid the crown, even if you hid it in your own hearts, he’d dig it up. That’s why he’s coming after you like a fierce storm, with thunder and earthquakes like Jove In Roman mythology, Jove (also known as Ju piter) was the king of the gods. Jove could stir up. So, if asking you for the crown doesn’t work, he will force you to give it to him. In the name of God, then, he asks that you deliver up the crown. He says to take pity on the poor souls whom this ravenous war will swallow up. The widows' tears, the orphans' cries, the dead men’s blood, the girls mourning for their husbands, the fathers and the men they might have married will all be your fault. This is his claim, his threat, and my message. If the Dauphin is here, I have a message for him, too."
"For us, we will consider of this further. Back to our brother England.","I’ll think it over. Tomorrow, I’ll let you know what I’ve decided and what answer you should deliver to the king of England."
"For the Dauphin, I stand here for him. What to him from England?","Regarding the Dauphin, you can speak to me. What’s the message from the English king?"
"Scorn and defiance, slight regard, contempt, The mighty sender, doth he prize you at. Thus says my king: an if your father’s Highness Do not, in grant of all demands at large, Sweeten the bitter mock you sent his Majesty, That caves and womby vaultages of France Shall chide your trespass and return your mock In second accent of his ordinance.","Scorn and defiance, indifference, contempt, and any insult that wouldn’t disgrace the mighty sender—that’s the value he puts on you. And my king goes on: if your royal father does not sweeten the bitter insult you sent my king and grant all our demands, Henry’s artillery will give you so resounding an answer that the very caves and vaulted cathedrals of France shall echo your mocking of him back in your face."
"Say, if my father render fair return, Nothing but odds with England. To that end, As matching to his youth and vanity, I did present him with the Paris balls.","Say this: if my father sends a friendly answer, it is against my will. I want nothing but conflict with England. To that end, I presented him with the tennis balls, the perfect expression of his inexperience and frivolity."
"He’ll make your Paris Louvre shake for it, And be assured you’ll find a difference, As we his subjects have in wonder found, Between the promise of his greener days And these he masters now. Now he weighs time In your own losses, if he stay in France.","He’ll make your palace tremble for this insult, even if it were the mightiest in all of Europe. And, make no mistake, you’ll find, as we his subjects have, an amazing difference between the king as a young man and the way he is now. Now he uses his time wisely, as you will see by your own casualties, if he remains in France."
Tomorrow shall you know our mind at full.,We’ll give you an answer tomorrow.
"Dispatch us with all speed, lest that our king Come here himself to question our delay,","Don’t take too long, unless you want our king to come after me to ask what’s holding things up, because he’s already landed here."
You shall be soon dispatched with fair conditions. A night is but small breath and little pause To answer matters of this consequence.,You’ll have your answer soon. A night isn’t much time for addressing matters of this importance.
"Thus with imagined wing our swift scene flies In motion of no less celerity Than that of thought. Suppose that you have seen The well-appointed king at Hampton pier With silken streamers the young Phoebus fanning. Play with your fancies and in them behold, Upon the hempen tackle, shipboys climbing. Hear the shrill whistle, which doth order give Borne with th' invisible and creeping wind, Draw the huge bottoms through the furrowed sea, Breasting the lofty surge. Oh, do but think You stand upon the rivage and behold For so appears this fleet majestical Holding due course to Harfleur. Follow, follow! Grapple your minds to sternage of this navy And leave your England, as dead midnight still, Either past or not arrived to pith and puissance, For who is he whose chin is but enriched With one appearing hair that will not follow These culled and choice-drawn cavaliers to France? Behold the ordnance on their carriages, With fatal mouths gaping on girded Harfleur. Suppose th' Ambassador from the French comes back, Tells Harry that the king doth offer him","And so, on the wings of imagination and at the speed of thought, our scene flies swiftly on. Imagine that you have seen the well-equipped king at Dover pier set sail in full royal regalia and his noble fleet fan the rising sun with its silken banners. Give your imagination free rein. Picture the cabin boys climbing around the rigging. Hear the shrill whistle that brings order to the hubbub. Picture the linen sails driven by the invisible and subtle wind as they pull the vast hulls through the wrinkled sea, breasting the high waves. Pretend that you’re standing on the shore, watching a city dance on the shifting waves, and you’ll have an idea of the look of this majestic fleet as it holds a straight course for Harfleur. Follow it, follow it! Hitch your minds to this navy’s sterns and leave your England, silent as midnight, guarded by grandfathers, babies, and old women. For what male subject is there old enough for his chin to be graced with even one hair who doesn’t want to follow this select band of hand-picked knights to France? Once there, make your thoughts work harder, and witness a siege. Take in the wheeled canons with their deadly gaping mouths trained on the walled city of Harfleur. Imagine the French ambassador returning to inform Harry that the king offers him"
"Some petty and unprofitable dukedoms. The offer likes not, and the nimble gunner With linstock now the devilish cannon touches,","his daughter, Katherine, with some insignificant, unprofitable dukedoms as her dowry. The offer doesn’t go over well, and the nimble gunner now moves to ignite the devilish canon."
And down goes all before them. Still be kind,Down goes everything in their path. Indulge us further and supplement our performance with your own imaginings.
"Once more unto the breach, dear friends, once more, Or close the wall up with our English dead! In peace there’s nothing so becomes a man As modest stillness and humility, Then imitate the action of the tiger: Stiffen the sinews, summon up the blood, Disguise fair nature with hard-favored rage, Then lend the eye a terrible aspect, Like the brass cannon, let the brow o'erwhelm it As fearfully as doth a gallèd rock O'erhang and jutty his confounded base, Swilled with the wild and wasteful ocean. Hold hard the breath and bend up every spirit To his full height. On, on, you noblest English, Whose blood is fet from fathers of war-proof, Fathers that, like so many Alexanders, And sheathed their swords for lack of argument. Dishonor not your mothers. Now attest That those whom you called fathers did beget you. Be copy now to men of grosser blood, Whose limbs were made in England, show us here The mettle of your pasture. Let us swear That you are worth your breeding, which I doubt not,","Attack the breach in the city wall once more, dear friends, attack it once more—or else let’s close it up with English corpses. In peacetime, nothing looks better in a man than restraint and humility. But when the battle trumpet blows in our ears, then it’s time to act like the tiger. With muscles taut and blood stirred up, hide your civilized nature under the guise of ugly rage. Lend your eyes a terrifying gleam and let them jut out from the portholes of the head like brass cannon. Make your brow jut out over your eyes like a frightening cliff over the wild and desolate ocean. Now grit your teeth and let your nostrils flare. Take a deep breath and draw on every impulse to its fullest strength. On, on, you noblest Englishmen, descended as you are from battle-tested fathers, fathers who, like so many Alexander the Greats, have fought in these regions from morning until night, sheathing their swords only when there was no one left to fight. Don’t dishonor your mothers! Prove that the men you call your fathers did truly conceive you. Serve as an example to men of common birth and teach them how to fight. And you, good farmers, whose limbs were made in England, show us here the vigor of your upbringing. Prove you are worthy of your birth, which I do not doubt for a moment. For there isn’t one of you so low-born that your eyes don’t shine with noble luster. I see you’re standing like greyhounds"
"For there is none of you so mean and base I see you stand like greyhounds in the slips, Straining upon the start. The game’s afoot. Follow your spirit, and upon this charge Cry “God for Harry, England, and Saint George!”","on a leash, straining for the moment when you’ll be let loose. The hunt is on! Follow your spirit, and as you charge cry, “God for Harry, England, and Saint George!”"
"On, on, on, on, on! To the breach, to the breach!","On, on, on, on, on! To the breach, to the breach!"
"Pray thee, corporal, stay. The knocks are too hot, and, for mine own part, I have not a case of lives. The humor of it is too hot; that is the very plainsong of it.","Please, corporal, stop! The fighting is too violent. Speaking for myself, I only have one life, not dozens. Too violent! That’s just how it is, the plain truth of it."
"(sings) Knocks go and come. God’s vassals drop and die, And sword and shield In bloody field Doth win immortal fame.","The plain truth doesn’t lie. You can see how it is all around. Fighting comes and goes, God’s loyal servants drop and die. (he sings) And sword and shield In bloody field Will win immortal fame."
"Would I were in an alehouse in London! I would give all my fame for a pot of ale, and safety.",I wish I were in an alehouse in London! I would give all my glory for a mug of ale and safety.
"And I. If wishes would prevail with me, My purpose should not fail with me, But thither would I hie.","Me too. (he sings) If wishes could avail me, My purpose would not fail me, It’s there that I would go."
"(sings) As duly, But not as truly, As bird doth sing on bough.",(singing) As surely but more poorly Than birds sing on the bough.
"Up to the breach, you dogs! Avaunt, you cullions!","Up to the breach, you dogs! Go! Get a move on, you scrotems!"
"Be merciful, great duke, to men of mold. Abate thy rage, abate thy manly rage, abate thy rage, great duke. Good bawcock, 'bate thy rage. Use lenity, sweet chuck.","Great Duke, be merciful to mortal men. Calm your rage, your manly rage! Calm your rage, great Duke! Dear man, calm your rage. Be lenient, dearest!"
These be good humors. Your Honor wins bad humors.,This is healthy talk. Your Honor’s is unhealthy talk.
"As young as I am, I have observed these three swashers. I am boy to them all three, but all they three, though they would serve me, could not be man to me. For indeed three such antics do not amount to a man: for Bardolph, he is white-livered and red-faced, by the means whereof he faces it out but fights not; for Pistol, he hath a killing tongue and a quiet sword, by the means whereof he breaks words and keeps whole weapons; for Nym, he hath heard that men of few words are the best men, and therefore he scorns to say his prayers, lest he should be thought a coward, but his few bad words are matched with as few good deeds, for he never broke any man’s head but his own, and that was against a post when he was drunk. They will steal anything and call it purchase. Bardolph stole a lute case, bore it twelve leagues, and sold it for three halfpence. Nym and Bardolph are sworn brothers in filching, and in Calais they stole a fire shovel. I knew by that piece of service the men would carry coals. They would have me as familiar with men’s pockets as their gloves or their handkerchers, which makes much against my manhood, if I should take from another’s pocket to put into mine, for it is plain pocketing up of wrongs. I must leave them and seek some better service. Their villainy goes against my weak stomach, and therefore I must cast it up.","Young though I am, I’ve been observing these three blowhards closely. I am “man”—which is to say, servant—to all three of them. Yet not one among them, if all three were to wait on me, could be my “man,” because three such fakes don’t amount to a man. Take Bardolph: he is cowardly and blustery. He acts tough, but he doesn’t fight. Pistol, meanwhile, has a lethal tongue but an inert sword. He destroys words but keeps his weapon in one piece. As for Nym, he’s heard men of valor are men of few words, so he refuses to pray lest he should be thought a coward. But he has as few good deeds as he has bad words—for he never cracked anyone’s head but his own, and that was against a post when he was drunk. They will steal anything and call it spoils. Bardolph stole a lute case, carried it for thirty-six miles, and sold it for a penny and a half. Nym and Bardolph are sworn brothers in crime, and in Calais they stole a fire shovel: I could see from that that they had no pride. They would like me to be as familiar with men’s pockets as their gloves and handkerchiefs, which goes against my manhood, because to take something from another’s pocket and put it into my own is plain stealing. I must leave them and seek some better employment. Their villainy nauseates me, and I must therefore vomit it up."
"Captain Fluellen, you must come presently to the mines; the duke of Gloucester would speak with you.","Captain Fluellen, you must come straight to the tunnels. The duke of Gloucester wants a word with you."
"To the mines? Tell you the duke it is not so good to come to the mines, for, look you, the mines is not according to the disciplines of the war. The concavities of it is not sufficient, for, look you, th' athversary, you may discuss unto the duke, look you, is digt himself four yard under the countermines. By Cheshu, I think he will plow up all if there is not better directions.","The tunnels! Tell the duke I’m not so keen to come to the tunnels. For the tunnels, see, are not strictly in accordance with the proper practice of war. They’re not deep enough. For the enemy, see—and you can explain this to the duke, see—has dug its own tunnels four yards below ours. By Jesus, I think they will blow up everything if we don’t improve our tactics."
"The duke of Gloucester, to whom the order of the siege is given, is altogether directed by an Irishman, a very valiant gentleman, i' faith.","The duke of Gloucester, who has command over the siege, is in consultation with an Irishman, a very valiant gentleman indeed."
"It is Captain Macmorris, is it not?","It’s Captain Macmorris, right?"
I think it be.,I think so.
"By Cheshu, he is an ass, as in the world. I will verify as much in his beard. He has no more directions in the true disciplines of the wars, look you, of the Roman disciplines, than is a puppy dog.","Jesus, he’s an ass if there ever was one! I will say as much to his face. He knows no more about the proper practice of war, see—the ancient practices—than a puppy."
"Here he comes, and the Scots captain, Captain Jamy, with him.","Here he comes with Captain Jamy, the Scots captain."
"Captain Jamy is a marvelous falorous gentleman, that is certain, and of great expedition and knowledge in th' aunchient wars, upon my particular knowledge of his directions. By Cheshu, he will maintain his argument as well as any military man in the world in the disciplines of the pristine wars of the Romans.","Captain Jamy is a wonderfully valorous gentleman, that’s certain, one with great learning and knowledge concerning ancient warfare, I happen to know from his maneuvers. By Jesus, he will defend his position on the practices of the ancient Roman wars as well as any military man in the world."
"I say gudday, Captain Fluellen.","Good day to you, Captain Fluellen."
"Godden to your Worship, good Captain James.","Good evening to your Worship, good Captain James."
"How now, Captain Macmorris, have you quit the mines?","Tell me, Captain Macmorris, have you left the tunnels? Have the excavators stopped work?"
"By Chrish, la, ’tish ill done. The work ish give over. The trompet sound the retreat. By my hand I swear, and my father’s soul, the work ish ill done. It ish give over. I would have blowed up the town, so Chrish save me, la, in an hour. Oh, ’tish ill done, ’tish ill done, by my hand, ’tish ill done.","Christ, it’s a disaster. The work is stopped, the trumpet has sounded the retreat. I swear by this hand and my father’s soul, the whole thing is a disaster. It’s all stopped. I could have blown up the town in an hour. Oh, it’s a disaster, a disaster, by this hand, it’s a disaster."
"Captain Macmorris, I beseech you now, will you voutsafe me, look you, a few disputations with you as partly touching or concerning the disciplines of the war, the Roman wars? In the way of argument, look you, and friendly communication, partly to satisfy my opinion, and partly for the satisfaction, look you, of my mind, as touching the direction of the military discipline, that is the point.","Captain Macmorris, I beg your pardon, but would you grant me a discussion or two with you, see, partly touching on or concerning the practice of war, the Roman wars, for the sake of argument, see, and friendly conversation? Partly to confirm my opinion and partly for the satisfaction, see, of my mind, with respect to the demands of proper military practice—that’s the point?"
"It sall be vary gud, gud feith, gud captens bath, and I sall quit you with gud leve, as I may pick occasion, that sall I, marry.","Oh, this is fine, good captains. And I’ll answer you, if I may, when I get a chance. Indeed I will."
"It is no time to discourse, so Chrish save me. The day is hot, and the weather, and the wars, and the king, and the dukes. It is no time to discourse. The town is beseeched, and the trumpet call us to the breach, and we talk and, be Chrish, do nothing, ’tis shame for us all. So God sa' me, ’tis shame to stand still. It is shame, by my hand. And there is throats to be cut and works to be done, and there ish nothing done, so Chrish sa' me, la.","This is no time to have a discussion. Christ! The day is hot and between the weather and the wars and the king and the dukes, it’s no time for a discussion. The town is besieged, and the trumpet calls us to the gap, and we talk and do nothing, by Christ. It’s a disgrace to us all. God save me, it’s a disgrace, by this hand, when there are throats to be cut and work to be done, and nothing gets done, Christ save me."
"By the mess, ere theise eyes of mine take themselves to slomber, ay’ll de gud service, or I’ll lig i' th' grund for it, ay, or go to death. And I’ll pay ’t as valorously as I may, that sall I suerly do, that is the breff and the long. Marry, I wad full fain heard some question ’tween you tway.","I swear by the mass, before I close my eyes to go to sleep, I’ll put in some good fighting, or I’ll lie in the ground dead. And I’ll kill as valiantly as I can, that’s for sure. That is the long and the short of it. But truly, I would love to hear the two of you discuss warfare."
"Captain Macmorris, I think, look you, under your correction, there is not many of your nation—","Captain Macmorris, I think, see—correct me if I’m wrong—there are not many of your nation—"
Of my nation? What ish my nation? Ish a villain and a basterd and a knave and a rascal. What ish my nation? Who talks of my nation?,My nation? What is my nation? It’s a villain and a bastard and a coward and a rascal. What is my nation? Who talks of my nation?
"Look you, if you take the matter otherwise than is meant, Captain Macmorris, peradventure I shall think you do not use me with that affability as, in discretion, you ought to use me, look you, being as good a man as yourself, both in the disciplines of war and in the derivation of my birth and in other particularities.","Captain Macmorris, if you take my words in some way other than how they were meant, see, I’ll have to think you’re not treating me with the good will you ought to, see, since I am as good a man as yourself, both in the practice of war and in my country of origin and in other respects."
"I do not know you so good a man as myself. So Chrish save me, I will cut off your head.","I do not know that you are as good a man as myself. So, by Christ, I’ll cut off your head."
"Gentlemen both, you will mistake each other.","Now, now, both of you gentlemen! You go out of your way to misunderstand each other."
"Ah, that’s a foul fault.","Yes, and that’s a serious failing."
The town sounds a parley.,The town is asking for a pause in the fighting for negotiation.
"Captain Macmorris, when there is more better opportunity to be required, look you, I will be so bold as to tell you I know the disciplines of war, and there is an end.","Captain Macmorris, when we have more leisure, see, I will be so bold as to show you I know about the practice of warfare, and that’s that."
"How yet resolves the governor of the town? This is the latest parle we will admit. Therefore to our best mercy give yourselves Or, like to men proud of destruction, A name that in my thoughts becomes me best, If I begin the batt'ry once again, I will not leave the half-achieved Harfleur Till in her ashes she lie burièd. And the fleshed soldier, rough and hard of heart, In liberty of bloody hand, shall range With conscience wide as hell, mowing like grass Your fresh fair virgins and your flow'ring infants. Arrayed in flames like to the prince of fiends, Do with his smirched complexion all fell feats Enlinked to waste and desolation? What is ’t to me, when you yourselves are cause, Of hot and forcing violation? What rein can hold licentious wickedness When down the hill he holds his fierce career? We may as bootless spend our vain command As send precepts to the Leviathan To come ashore. Therefore, you men of Harfleur, Take pity of your town and of your people Whiles yet my soldiers are in my command,","What has the governor of the town decided? This is the final discussion I will grant. So submit to my mercy or, like men who revel in their own destruction, challenge me to do my worst. For, as I am a soldier, the name I think suits me best, once I begin my attack on Harfleur again, I will not leave the half-conquered town until she lies buried in her own ashes. The gates of mercy will be closed by then, and harsh and hard-hearted soldiers, who have tasted blood, will have free reign to commit whatever violence they want, mowing down your lovely young virgins and budding infants. What will it matter to me, since you will have brought it on yourselves, if sacrilegious war, dressed in red like Satan, his face blackened by smoke, should commit every form of savage destruction and ruin? What will it matter to me if your innocent maidens are raped, since you will have asked for it? What power can rein in promiscuous evil once it’s gotten rolling? We might as well send orders to the whale to come ashore as try to restore order in soldiers carried away with their looting. Therefore, you men of Harfleur, take pity on your town and on your people while I still have control over my men, while the cool and moderate winds of mercy still have power to disperse the depraved, infected clouds of murder, plunder, and crazed soldiers defile your shrieking daughters with their foul hands, and your fathers dragged by their silver beards, their reverend heads dashed against the walls. Expect to see your naked babies skewered upon pikes while their"
"O'erblows the filthy and contagious clouds Of heady murder, spoil, and villainy. If not, why, in a moment look to see The blind and bloody soldier with foul hand Your fathers taken by the silver beards And their most reverend heads dashed to the walls, Your naked infants spitted upon pikes Whiles the mad mothers with their howls confused At Herod’s bloody-hunting slaughtermen. What say you? Will you yield and this avoid Or, guilty in defense, be thus destroyed?","grief-crazed mothers tear the clouds with their loud cries, just as the women of Judea did when Herod slaughtered their infants. What do you say? Will you surrender and avoid all this or be called to account for the destruction of this town?"
"Our expectation hath this day an end. Returns us that his powers are yet not ready To raise so great a siege. Therefore, great King, We yield our town and lives to thy soft mercy. Enter our gates, dispose of us and ours,","Today our hopes are at an end. The Dauphin, whom we asked for reinforcements, sends back the answer that he’s not yet in a position to raise so great an army. Therefore, great king, we surrender our town and lives to your kind mercy. Enter our gates and do as you like with us and our possessions, for we cannot defend ourselves any longer."
Open your gates.,Open your gates.
"Come, uncle Exeter, Go you and enter Harfleur. There remain And fortify it strongly 'gainst the French. The winter coming on and sickness growing Upon our soldiers, we will retire to Calais. Tonight in Harfleur will we be your guest; Tomorrow for the march are we addressed.","Come, uncle Exeter, enter Harfleur. Stay there and fortify it well against the French. Deal with them all mercifully on my behalf, dear uncle. Meanwhile, with winter coming on and sickness growing among our troops, we’ll withdraw to Calais. Tonight in Harfleur we will be your guest; tomorrow we’ll march on."
"Alice, tu as été en Angleterre, et tu parles bien le langage.","(speaking in French, for the entire scene) Alice, you have been to England and you know the language."
"Un peu, madame.","(speaking in French, for the entire scene) A little, madam."
"Je te prie, m'enseignez. Il faut que j'apprenne à parler. Comment appelez-vous la main en anglais?",Please teach me English. I must learn to speak it. What is the word for la main in English?
La main? Elle est appelée “de hand.”,La main? That is “de hand.”
“De hand.” Et les doigts?,“De hand.” And les doigts?
"Les doigts? Ma foi, j'oublie les doigts; mais je me souviendrai. Les doigts? Je pense qu'ils sont appelés “de fingres”; oui, “de fingres.”","Les doigts? Good lord, I forget les doigts. But it will come to me. The word for les doigts, I believe, is “de fangres.” Yes, “de fangres.”"
"La main, “de hand”; les doigts, “de fingres.” Je pense que je 									suis le bon écolier. J'ai gagné deux mots d'anglais vitement. 									Comment appelez-vous les ongles?","La main, “de hand”; les doigts, “de fangres.” I think I am a very apt student! I have learned two words of English already. What is the word for les ongles?"
Les ongles? Nous les appelons “de nails.”,“Les ongles?” That is “de nails.”
"“De nails.” Écoutez. Dites-moi si je parle bien: “de hand, de fingres, et de nails.”","“De nails.” Listen! Tell me if I’m saying it right. De hand, de fangres, et de nails.”"
"C'est bien dit, madame. Il est fort bon anglais.","Well done, madam. Excellent English."
Dites-moi l'anglais pour le bras.,Tell me the English for le bras.
"“De arme,” madame.","“De arm,” madam."
Et le coude?,And le coud?
“D'elbow.”,“D'elbow.”
“D'elbow.” Je m'en fais la répétition de tous les mots que 								vous m'avez appris dés à présent.,“D'elbow.” Let me practice all the words you’ve taught me so far.
"Il est trop difficile, madame, comme je pense.","It’s too difficult, I think, madam."
"Excusez-moi, Alice. Écoutez: “de hand, de fingres, de nails, de arma, de bilbow.”","I beg to differ, Alice. Listen: “de hand, de fangres, de nails, d'arma, de bilbow.”"
"“D'elbow,” madame.","“D'elbow,” madam."
Ô Seigneur Dieu! Je m'en oublie; “d'elbow.” Comment 								appelez-vous le col?,"Oh, Lord, I forgot! “D'elbow.” What is the word for le col?"
"“De nick,” madame.","“De neck,” madam."
“De nick.” Et le menton?,“De nick.” And le menton?
“De chin.”,“De chin.”
"“De sin.” Le col, “de nick”; le menton, “de sin.”","Le col, “de nick”; le menton, “de sin.”"
"Oui. Sauf votre honneur, en vérité, vous prononcez les mots 									aussi droit que les natifs d'Angleterre.","Yes. If I may say so, your Highness pronounces the words just like a native English speaker."
"Je ne doute point d'apprendre, par la grâce de Dieu, et en 									peu de temps.","I have no doubt I’ll learn it, and in a short time, too—God willing."
N'avez vous pas déjà oublié ce que je vous ai enseigné?,You haven’t forgotten what you just learned?
"Non, je réciterai à vous promptement: “de hand, de fingre, 								de nails—”","No, I’ll recite it for you right now: “de hand, de fangres, de nails—”"
"“De nails,” madame.","“De nails,” madame."
"“De nails, de arme, de ilbow.”","“De nails, de arme, de ilbow.”"
"Sauf votre honneur, “d'elbow.”","Forgive me, de elbow."
"Ainsi dis-je: “d'elbow, de nick, et de sin.” Comment 									appelez-vous le pied et la robe?","That’s what I said, “de elbow, de nick, et de sin.” What are the words for le pied and la robe?"
"“Le foot,” madame, et “le count.”","“De foot,” madame, and “ de count By “count,” Alice means “gown.” de count .”"
"“Le foot” et “de count.” Ô Seigneur Dieu! 								Ils sont mots de son mauvais, corruptible, gros, et impudique, et non pour les 								dames d'honneur d'user. Je ne voudrais prononcer ces mots 								devant les seigneurs de France pour tout le monde. Foh! 								“Le foot” et “le count”! Néanmoins, je réciterai une autre fois 								ma leçon ensemble: “d' hand, de fingre, de nails, d' arme, 								d'elbow, de nick, de sin, de foot, le count.”","“De foot” and “de count”! Oh, Lord, those are vulgar words—wicked, ugly, immodest, not fitting for respectable girls to speak. I would not utter those words in the presence of the lords of France for all the world. Ugh! “Le foot” and “le count”! Nevertheless, I will recite my lesson one more time all together: “de hand, de fangres, de nails, de arm, de elbow, de nick, de sin, de foot “Foot” and “count” sound to Katherine like the French foutre and con: to have sex and vagina, respectively. de foot , de coun.”"
"Excellent, madame!","That is excellent, madame!"
C'est assez pour une fois: Allons-nous à d”ner.,That’s enough for one lesson. Let’s go to lunch.
'Tis certain he hath passed the river Somme.,He’s certainly crossed the river Somme.
"An if he be not fought withal, my lord, Let us not live in France. Let us quit all And give our vineyards to a barbarous people.","And if he advances unopposed, my lord, let us abandon France. Let us leave everything and give our vineyards to the barbarous nation."
"The emptying of our fathers' luxury, Our scions, put in wild and savage stock, Spurt up so suddenly into the clouds And overlook their grafters?","God alive! Shall a few offshoots of our nation, born of our father’s lust—our branches grafted to wild and savage trunks—grow to such a height that they look down with contempt on the plants from which they first sprang The Dauphin is referring to the Nor man invasion of , in which William the Conqueror and natives of Normandy conquered England. sprang ?"
"Mort de ma vie, if they march along Unfought withal, but I will sell my dukedom To buy a slobb'ry and a dirty farm In that nook-shotten isle of Albion.","Normans, nothing more than bastard Normans, Norman bastards! I hope I die! If they march along unopposed, I will sell my dukedom for a sodden, filthy farm in that craggy isle of Albion."
"Is not their climate foggy, raw, and dull, On whom, as in despite, the sun looks pale, Killing their fruit with frowns? Can sodden water, A drench for sur-reined jades, their barley broth,","God of battles! Where do they get this spirit? Isn’t their climate foggy, cold, and dark? Doesn’t the sun shine palely down on them, as though in contempt, killing their fruit with frowns? Can boiled water (beer, they call it)—a drink for broken-down horses, heat their cold blood to such a valiant level? And shall our lively blood, quickened by wine, be so frosty? Oh, for the"
"And shall our quick blood, spirited with wine, Seem frosty? Oh, for honor of our land, Let us not hang like roping icicles Upon our houses' thatch, whiles a more frosty people “Poor” we may call them in their native lords.","honor of our land, let us not hang like ropes of icicles off the thatched roofs of our houses while men of a more frosty temperament sweat off their own gallant youth in our rich fields! Our fields may be rich, but they are ruled poorly."
"By faith and honor, Our madams mock at us and plainly say Our mettle is bred out and they will give To new-store France with bastard warriors.","By faith and honor, our wives mock us, telling us brazenly that our vigor has been so bred out of us that they plan to give their bodies to the lusty youth of England to resupply France with men who, though bastards, will at least be warriors."
"And teach lavoltas high, and swift corantos, Saying our grace is only in our heels And that we are most lofty runaways. English dancing schools.","They tell us we’d be better off in English dancing schools, where we could teach the latest dances, as our grace is all in our heels; we are no better than high-class deserters."
"Where is Montjoy the herald? Speed him hence. Let him greet England with our sharp defiance. Up, princes, and, with spirit of honor edged Charles Delabreth, High Constable of France; You dukes of Orléans, Bourbon, and of Berri, Alençon, Brabant, Bar, and Burgundy; Jacques Chatillon, Rambures, Vaudemont, Foix, Lestrale, Bouciqualt, and Charolois; High dukes, great princes, barons, lords, and knights, For your great seats now quit you of great shames. Bar Harry England, that sweeps through our land Rush on his host, as doth the melted snow Upon the valleys, whose low vassal seat The Alps doth spit and void his rheum upon. Go down upon him—you have power enough— Bring him our prisoner.","Where is Montjoy, the herald? Send him on his way quickly. Tell him to greet the king of England with our sharp defiance. Rise, princes, and, with a spirit of honor more sharply edged than your swords, rush to the battlefield: Charles Delabreth, High Constable of France; you dukes of Orléans, Bourbon, Berri, Alençon, Brabant, Bar, and Burgundy; Jaques Chatillon, Rambures, Vaudemont, Beaumont, Grandpré, Roussi, and Fauconberg, Foix, Lestrale, Bouciqualt, and Charolois. High dukes, great princes, barons, lords and knights—for the sake of the great positions you hold, rid yourselves of this great shame. Stop Harry of England, who is now sweeping through our land with banners drenched in the French blood he spilled at Harfleur. Rush on his army the way the melting snow of the Alps spits on the low valleys below them. Descend on him: you have power enough. And bring him into Rouen as our prisoner."
"This becomes the great! Sorry am I his numbers are so few, His soldiers sick and famished in their march, He’ll drop his heart into the sink of fear And for achievement offer us his ransom.","Now that’s a mission worthy of great men! I’m only sorry that his numbers are so few and those men he has sick and starving on the march. When he sees our army, I’m sure his heart will sink with fear and he’ll offer us a large sum in exchange for avoiding battleof."
"Therefore, Lord Constable, haste on Montjoy And let him say to England that we send —Prince Dauphin, you shall stay with us in Rouen.","Have Montjoy hurry, then, Lord Constable, and have him ask the king of England what he is willing to pay us to get out of the war. Prince Dauphin, you’ll stay with me in Rouen."
"Not so, I do beseech your Majesty.","No, please, I beg your Majesty."
"Be patient, for you shall remain with us. —Now forth, Lord Constable and princes all,","Be patient, because you’re staying with me. Go now, Lord Constable and all you princes, and quickly bring us news of England’s defeat."
"How now, Captain Fluellen? Come you from the bridge?","Greetings, Captain Fluellen! Have you just come from the bridge?"
"I assure you, there is very excellent services committed at the bridge.","I assure you, there are some excellent military operations being carried out at the bridge."
Is the duke of Exeter safe?,Is the duke of Exeter safe?
"The duke of Exeter is as magnanimous as Agamemnon, and a man that I love and honor with my soul and my heart and my duty and my life and my living and my uttermost power. He is not, God be praised and blessed, any hurt in the world, but keeps the bridge most valiantly, with excellent discipline. There is an aunchient lieutenant there at the pridge. I think in my very conscience he is as valiant a man as Mark Antony, and he is a man of no estimation in the world, but I did see him do as gallant service.","The duke of Exeter is as courageous as Agamemnon Agamemnon was the leader of the Greek army in the Trojan War. Mark Antony fought Brutus for control of the Roman Empire. Agamemnon and a man whom I love and honor deeply, with my soul, and my heart, and my duty, and my life, and my livelihood, to the very utmost of my being. He is not—God be praised and blessed—hurt in any way but is holding the bridge most valiantly, with excellent discipline. There is a standard-bearer there at the bridge. I truly think he is as valiant a man as Mark Antony. He is a man of no rank or consequence, but I saw him fight as gallantly as though he were."
What do you call him?,What is his name?
He is called Aunchient Pistol.,He is called Ensign Pistol.
I know him not.,I don’t know him.
Here is the man.,Here he is.
"Captain, I thee beseech to do me favors. The duke of Exeter doth love thee well.","Captain, I have a favor to beg of you. You’re on very good terms with the duke of Exeter."
"Ay, I praise God, and I have merited some love at his hands.","Yes, God be praised, I have managed to earn his favor."
"Bardolph, a soldier firm and sound of heart And of buxom valor, hath, by cruel Fate And giddy Fortune’s furious fickle wheel, That goddess blind","Bardolph, a soldier who is loyal and stout-hearted and full of valour, has, by a cruel trick of fate and a turn of silly Fortune’s wildly spinning wheel, that blind goddess who stands upon an ever-rolling stone—"
"By your patience, Aunchient Pistol, Fortune is painted blind, with a muffler afore her eyes, to signify to you that Fortune is blind; and she is painted also with a wheel to signify to you, which is the moral of it, that she is turning and inconstant, and mutability and variation; and her foot, look you, is fixed upon a spherical stone, which rolls and rolls and rolls. In good truth, the poet makes a most excellent description of it. Fortune is an excellent moral.","Now, now, Ensign Pistol. Fortune is depicted as blind, with a scarf over her eyes, to signify that she is blind. And she is depicted with a wheel to signify—this is the point—that she is turning and inconstant, and all about change and variation. And her foot, see, is planted on a spherical stone that rolls and rolls and rolls. Truly, artists do wonderful things with the image of Fortune. She provides an excellent moral."
"Fortune is Bardolph’s foe and frowns on him, A damnèd death! Let gallows gape for dog, let man go free, And let not hemp his windpipe suffocate. But Exeter hath given the doom of death Therefore go speak—the duke will hear thy voice— And let not Bardolph’s vital thread be cut With edge of penny cord and vile reproach. Speak, Captain, for his life, and I will thee requite.","Fortune is Bardolph’s enemy. She frowns on him, for he has stolen a pax Pax: a metal tablet bearing a picture of the crucifixion. “Pax” is Latin for “peace,” and during the mass, the pax would be kissed by the priest and then by the congregation in a “kiss of peace.” pax from a church and he must be hanged. A damnable death! It’s fine for dogs to be hung, but men should go free and not have their windpipes strangled with hemp. But Exeter has pronounced a death sentence—and for a cheap little pax. Therefore, go and speak for him! The duke will listen to you. Don’t let Bardolph’s life be brought to an end by a length of cheap rope and with this shame. Save his life, Captain, and I will repay you."
"Aunchient Pistol, I do partly understand your meaning.","Ensign Pistol, I think I understand you."
"Why then, rejoice therefore.",I’m glad to hear it.
"Certainly, aunchient, it is not a thing to rejoice at, for if, look you, he were my brother, I would desire the duke to use his good pleasure and put him to execution, for discipline ought to be used.","Actually, you shouldn’t be, because, see, even if he were my own brother I’d want the duke to stick to his plan and have Bardolph executed. Discipline must be kept."
"Die and be damned, and figo for thy friendship!",Then die and be damned! And I’m giving the finger to your friendship!
It is well.,Very well.
The fig of Spain!,And the Spanish finger The “Spanish fig” (also “figo” or “fico”) is an ob scene hand gesture. Spanish finger to you!
Very good.,Very good.
"Why, this is an arrant counterfeit rascal. I remember him now, a bawd, a cutpurse.","Why, that man is a total fraud and rascal. I remember him now. A pimp, a pickpocket."
"I’ll assure you, he uttered as prave words at the pridge as you shall see in a summer’s day. But it is very well; what he has spoke to me, that is well, I warrant you, when time is serve.","At the bridge he spoke as excellently as anyone I’ve ever heard, I promise you. But that’s alright. What he just said to me—it’s alright. I assure you, when the time comes—"
"Why, ’tis a gull, a fool, a rogue, that now and then goes to the wars to grace himself at his return into London under the form of a soldier. And such fellows are perfect in the great commanders' names, and they will learn you by rote where services were done—at such and such a sconce, at such a breach, at such a convoy; who came off bravely, who was shot, who disgraced, what terms the enemy stood on. And this they con perfectly in the phrase of war, which they","Why, he’s a fool, an idiot, a moron, a man who now and then joins the army so as to be able to give himself airs when he gets back to London and masquerades as a soldier. Such fellows have memorized the names of famous commanders, and they can tell you—having learned such things by rote, not by experience—where this or that battle was fought, at such and such fort, at such and such wall, with such and such protective escort. And they can say who fought well, who was"
"trick up with new-tuned oaths; and what a beard of the general’s cut and a horrid suit of the camp will do among foaming bottles and ale-washed wits is wonderful to be thought on. But you must learn to know such slanders of the age, or else you may be marvelously mistook.","shot, who was disgraced, what terms the enemy insisted on. And they study how to express these things in proper military jargon, which they embellish with fashionable oaths. And what a beard trimmed like the general’s or a rough uniform will do among foaming mugs and brains washed with ale, you wouldn’t believe. But you must learn to recognize such liars, or you will be greatly taken advantage of."
"I tell you what, Captain Gower. I do perceive he is not the man that he would gladly make show to the world he is. If I find a hole in his coat, I will tell him my mind.","I tell you what, Captain Gower; I perceive that he is not the man that he would have the world think he is. If I find an opportunity, I will give him a piece of my mind."
"Hark you, the king is coming, and I must speak with him from the pridge.—God pless your Majesty.","Listen. The king is coming, and I must speak with him about what went on at the bridge.—God bless your Majesty!"
"How now, Fluellen, cam’st thou from the bridge?","Tell me, Fluellen: did you just come from the bridge?"
"Ay, so please your Majesty. The duke of Exeter has very gallantly maintained the pridge. The French is gone off, look you, and there is gallant and most prave passages. Marry, th' athversary was have possession of the pridge, but he is enforced to retire, and the duke of Exeter is master of the pridge. I can tell your Majesty, the duke is a prave man.","Yes, your Majesty. The duke of Exeter has held the bridge very gallantly. The French have retreated, see, and there were great acts of courage. Indeed, the enemy nearly took the bridge, but he was forced to retreat, and the duke of Exeter holds the bridge. I can tell your Majesty, the duke is a brave man."
"What men have you lost, Fluellen?","What men have you lost, Fluellen?"
"The perdition of th' athversary hath been very great, reasonable great. Marry, for my part, I think the duke hath lost never a man, but one that is like to be executed for robbing a church, one Bardolph, if your Majesty know the man. His face is all bubukles and whelks and knobs and flames o' fire; and his lips blows at his nose, and it is like a coal of fire, sometimes plue and sometimes red, but his nose is executed, and his fire’s out.","The enemy’s losses have been very great, pretty substantial. To tell the truth, though, I think the duke hasn’t lost a single man, except for one who will probably be executed for robbing a church, one Bardolph—I don’t know if your Majesty knows the man. His face is all pustules and pockmarks, and pimples and inflammation, and his lips blow up toward his nose, which is like a red-hot coal, sometimes blue, sometimes red. But his nose is dead, and the fire’s put out."
"We would have all such offenders so cut off, and we give express charge that in our marches through the country there be nothing compelled from the villages, nothing taken but paid for, none of the French upbraided or abused in disdainful language; for when lenity and cruelty play for a kingdom, the gentler gamester is the soonest winner.","I want all such offenders to be dealt with that way, and I give precise orders that in our progress through the country there shall be nothing seized from the villages, nothing taken that is not paid for, none of the French harassed or abused in disrespectful language. For when mercy and cruelty compete for a kingdom, the gentler player is bound to win."
You know me by my habit.,You know from my clothing who I am.
"Well then, I know thee. What shall I know of thee?","Well then, I know who you are. What do you have to tell me?"
My master’s mind.,My master’s decision.
Unfold it.,Go ahead.
"Thus says my king: “Say thou to Harry of England, though we seemed dead, we did but sleep. Advantage is a better soldier than rashness. Tell him we could have rebuked him at Harfleur, but that we thought not good to bruise an injury till it were full ripe. Now we speak upon our cue, and our voice is imperial. England shall repent his folly, see his","My king says this: “Tell Harry of England: though we appeared dead, we were only asleep. Strategy makes a better soldier than haste. Tell him we could have driven him back at Harfleur but thought it unwise to burst a pustule before it had fully ripened. Now the time is right for us to speak, and we do so with imperial authority. The king of England will regret his foolishness, discover his weakness, and marvel at our restraint. Tell him therefore to consider what ransom he can offer as a prisoner of war. It must be commensurate with the losses we have suffered, the subjects we"
"weakness, and admire our sufferance. Bid him therefore consider of his ransom, which must proportion the losses we have borne, the subjects we have lost, the disgrace we have digested, which, in weight to reanswer, his pettiness would bow under. For our losses, his exchequer is too poor; for th' effusion of our blood, the muster of his kingdom too faint a number; and for our disgrace, his own person, kneeling at our feet but a weak and worthless satisfaction. To this, add defiance, and tell him, for conclusion, he hath betrayed his followers, whose condemnation is pronounced.” So far my king and master; so much my office.","have lost, and the indignity we have endured, for which he is too insignificant to sufficiently pay us back. His coffers are too poor to atone for our losses, his entire kingdom too small to account for the amount of blood we’ve shed, and the sight of him kneeling at our feet an empty satisfaction compared to the indignity we have put up with. Add defiance to all this and, by way of conclusion, tell him that he has betrayed the men who follow him, whose death sentence has been pronounced.” My king and master’s message delivered, my task is done."
What is thy name? I know thy quality.,What is your name? I know your position.
Montjoy.,Montjoy.
"Thou dost thy office fairly. Turn thee back, And tell thy king I do not seek him now But could be willing to march on to Calais Without impeachment, for, to say the sooth, Unto an enemy of craft and vantage, My people are with sickness much enfeebled, My numbers lessened, and those few I have Almost no better than so many French, I thought upon one pair of English legs Did march three Frenchmen. Yet, forgive me, God, That I do brag thus. This your air of France Hath blown that vice in me. I must repent. My ransom is this frail and worthless trunk, My army but a weak and sickly guard, Yet, God before, tell him we will come on Though France himself and such another neighbor Go bid thy master well advise himself: If we may pass, we will; if we be hindered, We shall your tawny ground with your red blood Discolor. And so, Montjoy, fare you well. We would not seek a battle as we are, Nor, as we are, we say we will not shun it. So tell your master.","You do your job well. Go back and tell your king I do not seek an encounter with him now but would be willing to march on to Calais without interference, for—to be honest, though it’s probably unwise to confess this to a powerful enemy who has the advantage—my men are considerably weakened by illness, my numbers reduced, and those few men I have almost no better than so many Frenchmen, though when they were in good form, I tell you, herald, I thought three Frenchmen walked on every pair of English legs. But God forgive me for bragging. It’s a vice I’ve picked up since I’ve been here, and I must get rid of it. Anyway, go tell your master I am here. My ransom is my own fragile, worthless body, my army but a weak and sickly escort. But, before God, tell him we will advance, even if the king of France himself and another foe as strong should stand in our way. (giving him money) That’s for your trouble, Montjoy. Go tell your master to consider carefully. If we’re allowed to pass, we will. If we’re prevented, we’ll discolor your golden ground with your red blood. And so, Montjoy, farewell. This is our whole answer: We do not seek a battle nor will we avoid one. Tell your master this."
I shall deliver so. Thanks to your Highness.,I’ll deliver the message. I thank your Highness.
I hope they will not come upon us now.,I hope they don’t attack us now.
"We are in God’s hand, brother, not in theirs. March to the bridge. It now draws toward night. Beyond the river we’ll encamp ourselves, And on tomorrow bid them march away.","We’re in God’s hands, brother, not in theirs. March to the bridge. Night is approaching. We’ll set up camp across the river and continue on tomorrow. Give the order to march."
"Tut, I have the best armor of the world. Would it were day!",Nonsense. I have the best armor in the world. I wish it were day!
"You have an excellent armor, but let my horse have his due.","You have wonderful armor, but give my horse his due."
It is the best horse of Europe.,It is the best horse in Europe.
Will it never be morning?,Will it never be morning?
"My lord of Orléans, and my Lord High Constable, you talk of horse and armor?","My lord of Orléans, and my lord high Constable, are you talking about horses and armor?"
You are as well provided of both as any prince in the world.,You are as well provided in both respects as any prince in the world.
"What a long night is this! I will not change my horse with any that treads but on four pasterns. Çà ha! He bounds from the earth, as if his entrails were hairs, le cheval volant, the Pegasus, qui a les narines de feu. When I bestride him, I soar; I am a hawk; he trots the air. The earth sings when he touches it. The basest horn of his hoof is more musical than the pipe of Hermes.","What a long night this is! I will not trade my horse for any that walks on four legs. He leaps from the ground as if his insides were light as hairs. He’s a flying horse, a Pegasus, breathing fire out of his nostrils. When I sit astride him, I soar, I am a hawk. He trots on air. The earth sings when he touches it. The lowest part of his hoof is more musical than Pan’s pipe."
He’s of the color of the nutmeg.,He’s the color of nutmeg.
"And of the heat of the ginger. It is a beast for Perseus. He is pure air and fire; and the dull elements of earth and water never appear in him, but only in patient stillness while his rider mounts him. He is indeed a horse, and all other jades you may call beasts.","And hot as ginger. He is an animal worthy of Perseus. He is pure air and fire. The duller elements of earth and water have no part in him, except in the moment of patient stillness when his rider mounts him. He is indeed worthy of the name “horse,” and you can call all the rest beasts."
"Indeed, my lord, it is a most absolute and excellent horse.","Indeed, my lord, he is a perfectly wonderful horse."
"It is the prince of palfreys. His neigh is like the bidding of a monarch, and his countenance enforces homage.",He is the prince of horses. His neigh is like a monarch’s command. His face demands respect.
"No more, cousin.","Enough, cousin."
"Nay, the man hath no wit that cannot, from the rising of the lark to the lodging of the lamb, vary deserved praise on my palfrey. It is a theme as fluent as the sea. Turn the sands into eloquent tongues, and my horse is argument for them all. 'Tis a subject for a sovereign to reason on, and for a sovereign’s sovereign to ride on, and for the world, familiar to us and unknown, to lay apart their particular functions and wonder at him. I once writ a sonnet in his praise and began thus: “Wonder of nature—”","No, the man who cannot extol the virtues of my horse from dawn to dusk is not particularly clever. It’s a subject as worthy of endless discussion as the changing sea. If each grain of sand had a tongue to eulogize, my horse would be a topic for them all. He is a subject for a king to contemplate, and for a king’s king to ride on, and for the world at large—both friend and stranger—to stop whatever they are doing and marvel at. I once wrote a sonnet in his praise which began, “Wonder of nature—”"
I have heard a sonnet begin so to one’s mistress.,I have heard a sonnet to one’s mistress that began like that.
"Then did they imitate that which I composed to my courser, for my horse is my mistress.","Then the writer imitated the one I composed to my steed, for my horse is my mistress."
Your mistress bears well.,Your mistress is a good mount.
Me well—which is the prescript praise and perfection of a good and particular mistress.,"A good mount for me—and that’s the highest praise and very definition of a good mistress, that she belong to one alone."
"Nay, for methought yesterday your mistress shrewdly shook your back.","Yes, but yesterday I could have sworn your mistress gave you a bumpy ride."
So perhaps did yours.,"So, perhaps, did yours."
Mine was not bridled.,Mine wasn’t wearing a bridle.
"Oh, then belike she was old and gentle, and you rode, like a kern of Ireland, your French hose off and in your straight strossers.","Oh, then I guess she was old and gentle, and you rode barelegged, like an Irish yokel."
You have good judgment in horsemanship.,You’re a good judge of horsemanship.
"Be warned by me, then: they that ride so, and ride not warily, fall into foul bogs. I had rather have my horse to my mistress.","Take a tip from me, then. Those who don’t take care when they ride often find themselves thrown into a messy situation. I’d rather have my horse than a mistress."
I had as lief have my mistress a jade.,I’d prefer to keep my mistress rather than some lame horse.
"I tell thee, Constable, my mistress wears his own hair.","I’ll tell you this, Constable, my mistress has his own hair."
I could make as true a boast as that if I had a sow to my mistress.,I could make the same boast even if I had a pig as my mistress.
"“Le chien est retourné à son propre vomissement, et la truie lavée au bourbier.” Thou mak’st use of anything.","“The dog returns to its own vomit, and the newly washed sow to its mud puddle.” You’d take anything for a mistress."
"Yet do I not use my horse for my mistress, or any such proverb so little kin to the purpose.",At least I don’t have a horse for my mistress—or a saying so beside the point.
"My Lord Constable, the armor that I saw in your tent tonight, are those stars or suns upon it?","My Lord Constable, are those stars or suns I saw on the armor in your tent tonight?"
"Stars, my lord.","Stars, my lord."
"Some of them will fall tomorrow, I hope.",I hope some will fall off tomorrow.
And yet my sky shall not want.,And yet I’ll still have plenty.
"That may be, for you bear a many superfluously, and ’twere more honor some were away.","No doubt, for you wear too many in the first place, and it might be more seemly to make do with fewer."
Ev'n as your horse bears your praises—who would trot as well were some of your brags dismounted.,"Yes, like your horse, who, staggering under your boasts, would trot more easily if some of them dismounted."
"Would I were able to load him with his desert! Will it never be day? I will trot tomorrow a mile, and my way shall be paved with English faces.","I only wish I could load him up with all the praise he deserves! Oh, will it never be day? I will ride out a mile tomorrow and leave the road paved with the faces of dead Englishmen."
"I will not say so, for fear I should be faced out of my way. But I would it were morning, for I would fain be about the ears of the English.","I’d say the same thing, but I’m afraid I’d be faced out of my way. But I do wish it were morning “Faced out of my way” would normally mean “bullied” or “pushed off the road,” but the Constable is just making a joke about all the faces in the Dauphin’s image. morning , for I long to be mixing it up with the English."
Who will go to hazard with me for twenty prisoners?,"Would anyone like to bet He’s suggesting they play a game of chance, using as stakes the Englishmen they plan to capture the next day. bet twenty prisoners with me?"
You must first go yourself to hazard ere you have them.,You’ll have to take some chances yourself before you catch them.
'Tis midnight. I’ll go arm myself.,It’s midnight. I’ll go put my armor on.
The Dauphin longs for morning.,The Dauphin really wants it to be morning.
He longs to eat the English.,He wants to eat the English.
I think he will eat all he kills.,"I think he’ll eat In other words, he won’t kill anyone. eat everyone he kills."
"By the white hand of my lady, he’s a gallant prince.","By my mistress’s white hand, he’s a gallant prince."
"Swear by her foot, that she may tread out the oath.","Swear by her foot, so she can stamp out the oath."
He is simply the most active gentleman of France.,He’s definitely the most active gentleman of France.
"Doing is activity, and he will still be doing.","Performing is activity, and he is always doing that."
He never did harm that I heard of.,He never did harm that I heard of.
Nor will do none tomorrow. He will keep that good name still.,And he’s not going to do any tomorrow. That part of his reputation will stand.
I know him to be valiant.,I know him to be valiant.
I was told that by one that knows him better than you.,I was told that by one who knows him better than you.
What’s he?,Who was that?
"Marry, he told me so himself; and he said he cared not who knew it.","Why, he told me so himself, and he said he didn’t care who knew it."
He needs not. It is no hidden virtue in him.,He doesn’t have to care. His virtue is not hidden.
"By my faith, sir, but it is; never anybody saw it but his lackey. 'Tis a hooded valor, and when it appears, it will bate.","Oh, but it is, sir. No one but his valet ever saw it. His courage is hidden, and when it is revealed, it will shrink."
Ill will never said well.,Ill will never prompted anything well said.
I will cap that proverb with “There is flattery in friendship.”,I’ll challenge that proverb with one of my own: “There is flattery in friendship.”
And I will take up that with “Give the devil his due.”,And I’ll match that with “Give the devil his due.”
Well placed; there stands your friend for the devil. Have at the very eye of that proverb with “A pox of the devil.”,Very apt! Your friend is equated with the devil. I’ll go straight for that proverb with “To hell with the devil.”
"You are the better at proverbs, by how much “A fool’s bolt is soon shot.”",You are better at proverbs than I am by as much as “A fool shoots quickly and overshoots his mark.”
You have shot over.,You have overshot.
'Tis not the first time you were overshot.,"I’ve outshot you, and not for the first time."
"My Lord High Constable, the English lie within fifteen hundred paces of your tents.","My Lord High Constable, the English lie within fifteen hundred paces of your tents."
Who hath measured the ground?,Who measured the ground?
The Lord Grandpré.,The Lord Grandpré.
"A valiant and most expert gentleman.—Would it were day! Alas, poor Harry of England! He longs not for the dawning as we do.",A very valiant and knowledgeable gentleman. If only it were day! Poor Harry of England! He doesn’t long for the dawn as we do.
What a wretched and peevish fellow is this king of England to mope with his fat-brained followers so far out of his knowledge.,"What a miserable and obstinate fellow this king of England is, to blunder with his fat-headed followers so far beyond his capacity."
"If the English had any apprehension, they would run away.","If the English had any sense, they would run away."
"That they lack, for if their heads had any intellectual armor, they could never wear such heavy head-pieces.","Well, obviously they don’t. If there were anything inside their heads, they could never wear such heavy helmets."
That island of England breeds very valiant creatures. Their mastiffs are of unmatchable courage.,That island of England breeds very valiant creatures. Their hounds are unequaled in courage.
"Foolish curs, that run winking into the mouth of a Russian bear and have their heads crushed like rotten apples. You may as well say, that’s a valiant flea that dare eat his breakfast on the lip of a lion.","Foolish dogs, blindly running straight toward a Russian bear only to have their heads crushed like rotten apples. You might just as well say, “That’s a valiant flea that dares to eat its breakfast on the lip of a lion.”"
"Just, just; and the men do sympathize with the mastiffs in robustious and rough coming on, leaving their wits with their wives. And then give them great meals of beef and iron and steel, they will eat like wolves and fight like devils.","Yes, exactly. And the men resemble their English hounds in their loud, showy ferocity, too, leaving their brains behind with their wives. Give them hefty meals of beef and iron and steel, and they will eat like wolves and fight like devils."
"Ay, but these English are shrewdly out of beef.","Yes, but these English are seriously short of beef."
"Then shall we find tomorrow they have only stomachs to eat and none to fight. Now is it time to arm. Come, shall we about it?","Then tomorrow we’ll find that they feel only like eating, not like fighting. It’s time to put our armor on. Shall we get started?"
"It is now two o'clock. But, let me see, by ten We shall have each a hundred Englishmen.","It’s two o'clock now. But let me see, by ten we shall each have captured a hundred Englishmen."
"Now entertain conjecture of a time When creeping murmur and the poring dark Fills the wide vessel of the universe. From camp to camp, through the foul womb of night, That the fixed sentinels almost receive The secret whispers of each other’s watch. Fire answers fire, and through their paly flames Each battle sees the other’s umbered face. Piercing the night’s dull ear; and from the tents The armorers, accomplishing the knights, With busy hammers closing rivets up, Give dreadful note of preparation. And, the third hour of drowsy morning named, Proud of their numbers and secure in soul, The confident and overlusty French Do the low-rated English play at dice Who like a foul and ugly witch doth limp So tediously away. The poor condemnèd English, Like sacrifices, by their watchful fires Sit patiently and inly ruminate Investing lank-lean cheeks and war-worn coats, Presenteth them unto the gazing moon So many horrid ghosts. Oh, now, who will behold The royal captain of this ruined band","Now summon up the image of stealthy murmurs and engulfing darkness filling the wide vessel of the universe. From camp to camp through the dark cave of night, the noise from both armies grows so quiet that those standing watch almost think they can hear the whispered secrets of one another’s sentinels. One by one, fires are lit on both sides, and through their pale flames, each army thinks he sees the smoke-tinged faces of the other. The horses of each army answer one another’s proud, threatening neighs as they pierce the dull night, and from the tents the sound of the blacksmiths' hammers as they fit out the knights, closing rivets up, adds a note of fear to the preparations. The country cocks crow and the clocks toll, sounding a drowsy three o'clock in the morning. Proud of their army and secure in their numbers, the confident and overeager French play dice, betting on how many worthless Englishmen each will capture. They scold the limping, slowly moving night, which, like an ugly old woman, takes so long to pass. The poor doomed English, like sacrificial beasts, sit patiently, and privately contemplate the dangers that will arrive with morning. With their grave faces, emaciated cheeks, and war-torn coats, they seem to the gazing moon like so many horrifying ghosts. Now, whoever spots the royal captain of this ruined army walking from camp to camp, from tent to tent, let him cry “Praise and glory on his head!” For out he goes visiting all his troops. He bids them good morning with a modest smile and calls"
"Let him cry, “Praise and glory on his head!” For forth he goes and visits all his host, Bids them good morrow with a modest smile, And calls them brothers, friends, and countrymen. How dread an army hath enrounded him, Nor doth he dedicate one jot of color Unto the weary and all-watchèd night, But freshly looks and overbears attaint That every wretch, pining and pale before, Beholding him, plucks comfort from his looks. A largess universal, like the sun, His liberal eye doth give to everyone, Behold, as may unworthiness define, A little touch of Harry in the night. And so our scene must to the battle fly, Where, Oh, for pity, we shall much disgrace, Right ill-disposed in brawl ridiculous, The name of Agincourt. Yet sit and see, Minding true things by what their mock'ries be.","them brothers, friends, and countrymen. There is no indication of the mighty army that surrounds them in his expression, nor has the long, sleepless night robbed his face of an ounce of color. Instead, he looks fresh and covers any signs of fatigue with a show of cheerfulness and sweet majesty that every sad and pale wretch takes comfort in when they see him. His generous eye notices everyone, doling out a bounty as far-reaching as the sun, thawing cold fear, so that low and well-born alike may all experience (for want of a better way of putting it) a little touch of Harry in the night. With that, our scene rushes on toward the battle, which we will represent with four or five worn-out fencing foils, a travesty of battle—forgive us!—that disgraces the name of Agincourt. Still, stay to watch, imagining the way it really was from our own inadequate imitation."
"Gloucester, ’tis true that we are in great danger. The greater therefore should our courage be. —Good morrow, brother Bedford. God almighty, There is some soul of goodness in things evil, For our bad neighbor makes us early stirrers, Which is both healthful and good husbandry. Besides, they are our outward consciences And preachers to us all, admonishing Thus may we gather honey from the weed And make a moral of the devil himself.","Gloucester, it’s true that we are in great danger. But our courage should only be the greater for that. Good morning, brother Bedford. God Almighty, there must be some essential goodness even in evil, if men would only look for it. In our case, our bad neighbors over their make us early risers, a healthy and sensible thing to be. Besides, they act as outward consciences and preachers to us all, a visible reminder that we should prepare ourselves for death. Think like that, and you’ll manage to get honey out of a common weed and find a moral lesson in the devil himself."
"Good morrow, old Sir Thomas Erpingham. A good soft pillow for that good white head","Good morning, old Sir Thomas Erpingham! A nice, soft pillow would be a more suitable place to lay that good white head than France’s hard, cold ground."
"Not so, my liege, this lodging likes me better, Since I may say, “Now lie I like a king.”","Not at all, my liege. I prefer these quarters, since they allow me to say, “Now I live like a king.”"
"'Tis good for men to love their present pains Upon example. So the spirit is eased. The organs, though defunct and dead before, Break up their drowsy grave and newly move, With casted slough and fresh legerity. Lend me thy cloak, Sir Thomas. Brothers both, Do my good morrow to them, and anon Desire them all to my pavilion.","It’s good for men to be given an example of how to take pleasure in discomfort. It eases the spirit. And when the mind is engaged, the rest of the body, dead and dull before, wakes up and comes to life with a new nimbleness and sensitivity, like a snake shedding its dead skin. Lend me your cloak, Sir Thomas. Brothers, give my regards to the princes in our camp. Say good day to them from me and ask them to come to my tent."
"We shall, my liege.","We shall, my liege."
Shall I attend your Grace?,Shall I accompany your Grace?
"Go with my brothers to my lords of England. I and my bosom must debate awhile, And then I would no other company.","No, my good knight. Go with my brothers to my English peers. I need to be alone with my thoughts for a while and don’t want any company."
"The Lord in heaven bless thee, noble Harry!","The Lord in heaven bless you, noble Harry!"
"God-a-mercy, old heart, thou speak’st cheerfully.","Bless you, old soul! Your words cheer my heart."
Qui vous là?,(speaking in French) Who goes there?
A friend.,A friend.
"Discuss unto me: art thou officer or art thou base, common, and popular?","Declare yourself to me. Are you an officer? Or are you low, vulgar, and of the common people?"
I am a gentleman of a company.,I am a gentleman of a company.
Trail’st thou the puissant pike?,Do you carry a pike?
Even so. What are you?,Exactly. What about you?
As good a gentleman as the emperor.,I’m as good a gentleman as the emperor.
Then you are a better than the king.,Then you’re a better man than the king.
"A lad of life, an imp of fame, Of parents good, of fist most valiant. I kiss his dirty shoe, and from heartstring I love the lovely bully. What is thy name?","The king’s a dear boy with a heart of gold, he’s a lively lad, a wag, born of fine parents, good with his fists. I kiss his dirty shoe, and from the bottom of my heart I love the lovely boy. What is your name?"
Harry le Roy.,Harry le Roy.
Le Roy? A Cornish name. Art thou of Cornish crew?,Le Roy? That’s a Cornish name. Are you with a Cornish company?
"No, I am a Welshman.","No, I am a Welshman."
Know’st thou Fluellen?,Do you know Fluellen?
Yes.,Yes.
Upon Saint Davy’s day.,Tell him I’ll take the leek out of his hat on Saint Davy’s Day and slap his head with it.
"Do not you wear your dagger in your cap that day, lest he knock that about yours.","You’d better not wear your dagger in your cap that day, or he might slap your head with it."
Art thou his friend?,Are you his friend?
And his kinsman too.,"Yes, and his relative, too."
The figo for thee then!,Then I’m giving you the finger.
I thank you. God be with you.,Thank you. God be with you.
My name is Pistol called.,My name is Pistol.
It sorts well with your fierceness.,The name suits your fierceness.
Captain Fluellen.,Captain Fluellen!
"So. In the name of Jesu Christ, speak fewer. It is the greatest admiration in the universal world when the true and aunchient prerogatifes and laws of the wars is not kept. If you would take the pains but to examine the wars of Pompey the Great, you shall find, I warrant you, that there is no tiddle toddle nor pibble babble in Pompey’s camp. I warrant you, you shall find the ceremonies of the wars and the cares of it and the forms of it and the sobriety of it and the modesty of it to be otherwise.","In the name of Jesus Christ, keep it down! It never ceases to amaze me the way people ignore the correct, traditional principles and rules of war. If you would take the trouble to study the tactics of Pompey the Great, I can tell you that you would find no tittle-tattle or pibble-pabble in Pompey’s camp. I tell you, you would find the rituals of war and, I promise you, its ceremonies and its solicitudes and its forms and its gravity and its discipline all to be quite counter to all this noise."
"Why, the enemy is loud. You hear him all night.",But the enemy is loud. You can hear them all night long.
"If the enemy is an ass and a fool and a prating coxcomb, is it meet, think you, that we should also, look you, be an ass and a fool and a prating coxcomb, in your own conscience, now?","And if the enemy is an ass and a fool and a prating idiot, does that mean, you think, that we should also be an ass and a fool and a prating idiot? Think about it."
I will speak lower.,I will lower my voice.
I pray you and beseech you that you will.,I’d be very glad if you would.
"Though it appear a little out of fashion, There is much care and valor in this Welshman.","Though he seems a little old-fashioned, there is much care and courage in this Welshman."
"Brother John Bates, is not that the morning which breaks yonder?","Brother John Bates, isn’t that dawn breaking over there?"
"I think it be, but we have no great cause to desire the approach of day.",I think it is. But we have no great reason to long for day.
"We see yonder the beginning of the day, but I think we shall never see the end of it.—Who goes there?","That’s the beginning of the day we see, but I don’t think we’ll see the end of it.—Who goes there?"
A friend.,A friend.
Under what captain serve you?,What captain do you serve?
Under Sir Thomas Erpingham.,Sir Thomas Erpingham.
"A good old commander and a most kind gentleman. I pray you, what thinks he of our estate?","A veteran commander and a very kind gentleman. Tell me, what does he think of our situation?"
"Even as men wracked upon a sand, that look to be washed off the next tide.","We’re men beached on the sand, hoping to be washed out by the next tide."
He hath not told his thought to the king?,"He hasn’t told this to the king, has he?"
"No. Nor it is not meet he should, for, though I speak it to you, I think the king is but a man as I am. The violet smells to him as it doth to me. The element shows to him as it doth to me. All his senses have but human conditions. His ceremonies laid by, in his nakedness he appears but a man, and though his affections are higher mounted than ours, yet when they stoop, they stoop with the like wing. Therefore, when he sees reason of fears as we do, his fears, out of doubt, be of the same relish as ours are. Yet, in reason, no man should possess him with any appearance of fear, lest he, by showing it, should dishearten his army.","No, nor would it be right for him to. Though it’s not my place to say so, I think the king is, after all, only a man, the same as me. The violet smells to him the same as it does to me. The sky appears to him much as it does to me, and all his senses are those of a mortal man. Without his fine clothes, the king appears just like any other naked man. And though his feelings may be pitched higher than ours, when they plummet, they plummet that much farther. Therefore, when he has reason to fear, as we do, his fears are without question of the same order. Still, it stands to reason that he mustn’t betray his fear, as it might dishearten his army."
"He may show what outward courage he will, but I believe, as cold a night as ’tis, he could wish himself in Thames up to the neck; and so I would he were, and I by him, at all adventures, so we were quit here.","He can act as brave as he wants, but I believe on a cold night like this he wishes he were neck-deep in the Thames, and I wish he were, too, and I with him, whatever the danger, so long as we were far away from here."
"By my troth, I will speak my conscience of the king. I think he would not wish himself anywhere but where he is.",I’ll tell you truly what I think about the king in my heart. I don’t think he wants to be anywhere but where he is.
"Then I would he were here alone; so should he be sure to be ransomed, and a many poor men’s lives saved.","Then I wish he were here alone. He’d be sure to be ransomed, and many a poor man’s life saved."
"I dare say you love him not so ill to wish him here alone, howsoever you speak this to feel other men’s minds. Methinks I could not die anywhere so contented as in the king’s company, his cause being just and his quarrel honorable.","Oh, I’m sure you don’t dislike him so much as to wish he were here alone, even though you say this to find out how the rest of us feel. I don’t think there’s anywhere I’d rather die than in the king’s company, as his cause is just and honorable."
That’s more than we know.,That’s more than we know.
"Ay, or more than we should seek after, for we know enough if we know we are the king’s subjects. If his cause be wrong, our obedience to the king wipes the crime of it out of us.","Yes, and more than we should seek to know. It’s enough that we know we’re the king’s subjects. If his cause is wrong, our obedience to the king clears us of responsibility for it."
"But if the cause be not good, the king himself hath a heavy reckoning to make, when all those legs and arms and heads, chopped off in a battle, shall join together at the latter day, and cry all, “We died at such a place,” some swearing, some crying for a surgeon, some upon their wives left poor behind them, some upon the debts they owe, some upon their children rawly left. I am afeard there are few die well that die in a battle, for how can they charitably dispose of anything, when blood is their argument? Now, if these men do not die well, it will be a black matter for the king that led them to it, who to disobey were against all proportion of subjection.","But if the cause is not just, the king himself will have a lot to answer for, when all those legs and arms and heads chopped off in battle shall join together on Judgment Day crying, “We died at such and such a place.” Some will be swearing, some crying for a surgeon, some for the wives that are destitute without them, some about the debts they owed, some for their children left unprovided for. I think few die well who die in battle. How can a person expect to resolve anything in a Christian manner when they’ve passed their lives killing? Now, if these men don’t die in a state of grace, it will be a heavy charge against the king who led them into battle, whom they, as his subjects, could not disobey."
"So, if a son that is by his father sent about merchandise do sinfully miscarry upon the sea, the imputation of his wickedness, by your rule, should be imposed upon his father that sent him. Or if a servant, under his master’s command transporting a sum of money, be assailed by robbers and die in many irreconciled iniquities, you may call the business of the master the author of the servant’s damnation. But this is not so. The king is not bound to answer the particular endings of his soldiers, the father of his son, nor the master of his servant, for they purpose not their death, when they purpose their services. Besides, there is no king, be his cause never so spotless, if it come to the arbitrament of swords, can try it out with all unspotted soldiers. Some, peradventure, have on them the guilt of premeditated and contrived murder; some, of beguiling virgins with the broken seals of perjury; some, making the wars their bulwark, that have before gored the gentle bosom of peace with pillage and robbery. Now, if these men have defeated the law and outrun native punishment, though they can outstrip men, they have no wings to fly from God. War is His beadle, war is His vengeance, so that here men are punished for before-breach of the king’s laws in now the king’s quarrel. Where they feared the death, they have borne life away; and where they would be safe, they perish. Then, if they die unprovided, no more is the king guilty of their damnation than he was before guilty of those impieties for the which they are now visited. Every subject’s duty is the king’s, but every subject’s soul is his own. Therefore should every soldier in the wars do as every sick man in his bed: wash every mote out of his conscience. And, dying so, death is to him advantage; or not dying, the time was blessedly lost wherein such preparation was gained. And in him that escapes, it were not sin to think that, making God so free an offer, He let him outlive that day to see His greatness and to teach others how they should prepare.","The king isn’t responsible for the particular end each soldier comes to, nor is the father responsible for his son’s final end or the master for his servant’s. The father and the master and the king didn’t order their subordinates' deaths when they ordered their services. Besides, there’s no king, however pure his cause, who, if it comes to a trial by combat, can rely on using completely blameless soldiers. Perhaps some may be guilty of plotting murder, some of seducing maidens with lies and then abandoning them; some, of looting and stealing before they were even hired as soldiers. Even if these men have escaped the law and punishment at home, they cannot escape God. War is God’s agent of justice. War is vengeance. So there are men here who have broken the king’s law earlier and are punished now in his war. When they feared death, they escaped with their lives; and now where they imagine they’re safe, they perish. So, if they die unprepared, the king is no more guilty of their damnation than he was guilty of the earlier crimes they’re finally being punished for. Every subject’s duty is the king’s, but every subject’s soul is his own. Therefore, every soldier should do as any man who is sick in his bed would do: clear his conscience of any stain. Then if he dies, his death serves him. Or, if he doesn’t die, the time he spent preparing himself was at least blessed. And in the case of the man who survives, one could be forgiven for supposing that God spared him exactly because he was so ready to die; now he can live to appreciate God’s greatness and teach others to prepare.By this reasoning, if a son is sent by his father on business and drowns at sea while still in a state of sin, his wickedness is his father’s fault. Or if a servant, carrying a sum of money for his master, is attacked by robbers and dies without confessing his sins, we can say that the master’s business is to blame for the servant’s damnation. But that isn’t so."
"'Tis certain, every man that dies ill, the ill upon his own head. The king is not to answer it.","It’s clear, every man must take responsibility for the manner of his own death. The king is not responsible for it."
"I do not desire he should answer for me, and yet I determine to fight lustily for him.","I don’t expect him to answer for me, and yet I’m determined to fight vigorously for him."
I myself heard the king say he would not be ransomed.,I myself heard the king say he would not be ransomed.
"Ay, he said so, to make us fight cheerfully, but when our throats are cut, he may be ransomed, and we ne'er the wiser.","Sure, he said so to make us fight cheerfully. But when our throats are cut, he could be ransomed without our being any the wiser."
"If I live to see it, I will never trust his word after.","If I live to see it, I’ll never trust his word again."
"You pay him then. That’s a perilous shot out of an elder gun, that a poor and private displeasure can do against a monarch. You may as well go about to turn the sun to ice with fanning in his face with a peacock’s feather. You’ll “never trust his word after.” Come, ’tis a foolish saying.","Yeah, right, go get him. That’s a lame threat from a toy gun, a poor individual’s private displeasure with a monarch. You may as well try to turn the sun to ice by fanning its face with a peacock feather. You’ll “never trust his word again.” Come on, that was a stupid thing to say."
Your reproof is something too round. I should be angry with you if the time were convenient.,Your scolding is somewhat overblown. I’d be angry with you if the occasion allowed.
"Let it be a quarrel between us, if you live.","Let it be a quarrel between us, if you live."
I embrace it.,I’m game.
How shall I know thee again?,How will I recognize you in the future?
"Give me any gage of thine, and I will wear it in my bonnet. Then, if ever thou dar’st acknowledge it, I will make it my quarrel.","Give me some trinket of yours, and I will wear it in my hat. Then, if you dare to acknowledge it, I’ll take up my quarrel with you."
Here’s my glove. Give me another of thine.,Here’s my glove; give me one of yours.
There.,Here.
"This will I also wear in my cap. If ever thou come to me and say, after tomorrow, “This is my glove,” by this hand I will take thee a box on the ear.","I’ll also wear this in my cap. If you come to me after tomorrow and say, “That’s my glove,” I swear by this hand, I will take it and give you a box on the ear."
"If ever I live to see it, I will challenge it.","If I ever see it, I will challenge you."
Thou dar’st as well be hanged.,You may as well undertake to be hanged.
"Well, I will do it, though I take thee in the king’s company.",I’ll do it even if I find you in the company of the king himself.
Keep thy word. Fare thee well.,Keep your word. Farewell.
"Be friends, you English fools, be friends. We have French quarrels enough, if you could tell how to reckon.","Be friends, you English fools, be friends: we have enough enemies on the French side, if either of you could count."
"Indeed, the French may lay twenty French crowns to one they will beat us, for they bear them on their shoulders. But it is no English treason to cut French crowns, and tomorrow the king himself will be a clipper.","Indeed, the French can bet twenty French crowns to one that they’ll beat us, they have such an army. But it’s no treason for an Englishman to cut off a French crown—a head, I mean—and tomorrow the king himself will do some snipping."
"We must bear all. O hard condition, Twin-born with greatness, subject to the breath Of every fool, whose sense no more can feel Must kings neglect that private men enjoy? And what have kings that privates have not too, Save ceremony, save general ceremony? And what art thou, thou idol ceremony? Of mortal griefs than do thy worshippers? What are thy rents? What are thy comings in? O ceremony, show me but thy worth! What is thy soul of adoration? Creating awe and fear in other men, Wherein thou art less happy, being feared, Than they in fearing? What drink’st thou oft, instead of homage sweet, And bid thy ceremony give thee cure! Think’st thou the fiery fever will go out With titles blown from adulation? Will it give place to flexure and low bending? Command the health of it? No, thou proud dream, That play’st so subtly with a king’s repose. I am a king that find thee, and I know 'Tis not the balm, the scepter, and the ball, The intertissued robe of gold and pearl, The farcèd title running 'fore the king, The throne he sits on, nor the tide of pomp","Upon the king! “Let’s lay everything upon the king: our lives, our souls, our debts, our anxious wives, our children, and our sins.” I must bear responsibility for all of it. What a painful condition responsibility is. It goes along with being born to greatness, but it makes you get badmouthed by every fool who only has his own suffering to care about. What infinite peace do king’s give up that private men enjoy? What do kings have that private men do not, besides the pomp of their position? And what is this useless ceremony of kings? What kind of god is ceremony, which suffers more than its worshippers do? What income, what profit does it bring in? Oh, ceremony, only show me your value! Why are you adored? Do you amount to anything besides position, status, and ritual, which inspire awe and fear in others? You’re less happy, being feared, than they are in fearing you. What do you get to drink, instead of sweet obedience, but poisonous flattery? Try being sick, great greatness, and see if ceremony can cure you! Do you think fiery fever can be put out by the windy puff of titles? Will it be chased away by bowing and scraping? You can command a beggar to bow on bended knee, but can you take possession of his health? No, vain illusion, so intricately bound up with a king’s rest. I who understand you, gorgeous ceremony, because I’m a king The outward symbols of kingship king and I know that neither the balm, the scepter, and the ball, the robe layered in gold and pearls, the fancy title that precedes the king, the throne he sits on, nor the tide of pomp that beats upon the high shore of this world —not all of these put together, not all of these laid down at night in an imperial bed, can cause the king to rest so soundly as does the miserable wretch who turns in at night with a full stomach and an empty mind, fed on the bread of his daily struggle. He never wakes to horrifying darkness, born of hell, but sweats in the hot sun from dawn to"
"That beats upon the high shore of this world. Not all these, laid in bed majestical, Can sleep so soundly as the wretched slave, Who, with a body filled and vacant mind, Gets him to rest, crammed with distressful bread; But, like a lackey, from the rise to set Sweats in the eye of Phoebus, and all night Sleeps in Elysium; next day after dawn, Doth rise and help Hyperion to his horse, With profitable labor to his grave. And, but for ceremony, such a wretch, Winding up days with toil and nights with sleep, Had the forehand and vantage of a king. Enjoys it, but in gross brain little wots What watch the king keeps to maintain the peace, Whose hours the peasant best advantages.","dusk and all night long sleeps in peace. Come morning, he wakes and helps the sun into his chariot and so wears out the ever-rolling years until his death. Apart from ceremony, this poor creature who spends his days in toil and his nights in sleep is better off than the king. The peasant enjoys his country’s peace without ever worrying his dull head about the vigil the king must keep to maintain that peace."
"My lord, your nobles, jealous of your absence,","My lord, your noble subjects are looking for you all over the camp. They’re anxious to see you."
"Good old knight, Collect them all together at my tent. I’ll be before thee.","Good old knight, gather them all together at my tent. I’ll meet you there."
"I shall do’t, my lord.","Consider it done, my lord."
"Possess them not with fear. Take from them now The sense of reck'ning ere th' opposèd numbers Pluck their hearts from them. Not today, O Lord, Oh, not today, think not upon the fault I Richard’s body have interrèd anew, And on it have bestowed more contrite tears Than from it issued forcèd drops of blood. Five hundred poor I have in yearly pay, Toward heaven to pardon blood. And I have built Two chantries where the sad and solemn priests Sing still for Richard’s soul. More will I do— Though all that I can do is nothing worth, Imploring pardon.","Oh God of battles, bolster my soldiers' courage. Don’t let them know fear. Rob them of the ability to count before the numbers against them overwhelm their courage. And just for today, Oh, Lord, just today don’t think of the crime my father committed in seizing the crown! I’ve transferred Richard’s body to a new grave and on it poured more tears of remorse than it has shed drops of blood. I’ve hired five hundred almsmen to hold up their withered hands to heaven, praying for my pardon twice a day throughout the year. And I’ve built two chapels where solemn priests sing continually for Richard’s soul. I will do more, though nothing I can do is any good since this remorse comes after the crime, asking for pardon."
My liege.,My liege.
"My brother Gloucester’s voice.—Ay, I know thy errand. I will go with thee.","My brother Gloucester’s voice? Yes, I know why you’ve come. I’ll go with you. The day, my friends, and everything await me."
"The sun doth gild our armor. Up, my lords.","The sun glints off our armor. Awake, my lords!"
"Montez à cheval! My horse, varlet! Lackey! Ha!","Mount up our horses! Bring my horse, lackey! Ha!"
O brave spirit!,"Oh, brave spirit!"
Via les eaux et la terre.,He’ll take me through flood and field.
Rien puis? L'air et feu?,Is that all? How about air and fire?
"Cieux, cousin Orléans.","Just the heavens, cousin OrlÉans."
"Now, my Lord Constable?","Is it time, my Lord Constable?"
Hark how our steeds for present service neigh.,"Listen to our horses neighing, longing to be working."
"Mount them and make incision in their hides, And dout them with superfluous courage. Ha!",Mount them and dig your spurs into their flanks so that their hot blood may spurt in English eyes and douse them with some of the spare courage we have around. Ha!
"What, will you have them weep our horses' blood? How shall we then behold their natural tears?","What, you want them to weep our horses' blood? Then how will we see their own natural tears?"
"The English are embattled, you French peers.","The English are in the field, French lords."
"Do but behold yond poor and starvèd band, And your fair show shall suck away their souls, Leaving them but the shales and husks of men. There is not work enough for all our hands, To give each naked curtal axe a stain, That our French gallants shall today draw out And sheathe for lack of sport. Let us but blow on them, The vapor of our valor will o'erturn them. That our superfluous lackeys and our peasants, Who in unnecessary action swarm About our squares of battle, were enough To purge this field of such a hilding foe, Took stand for idle speculation, But that our honors must not. What’s to say? A very little little let us do, And all is done. Then let the trumpets sound For our approach shall so much dare the field That England shall couch down in fear and yield.","To our horses, you gallant princes. Let’s mount straight away. All we have to do is look at that poor starving army, and our wonderful display of strength will eat away their souls, leaving them the mere husk of men. There isn’t enough work out there to keep us all busy, and hardly enough blood in all their sickly veins put together to put a stain on each of our swords, which our French knights will take out and then put away again, with nothing to do. Let’s blow on them. The breath of our valor will send them sprawling. There’s no question, lords, but that those extra servants and peasants swarming uselessly around our battle formations would be sufficient to rid this field of such a good-for-nothing foe, while we ourselves stood at the base of this mountain idly looking on. But our honor wouldn’t stand for that. What’s there to say? Doing the very least will do the whole job. Let the trumpets sound the signal to mount up and march. Our advance will so dazzle the enemy that England will cower in fear and surrender."
"Why do you stay so long, my lords of France? Yond island carrions, desperate of their bones, Their ragged curtains poorly are let loose, And our air shakes them passing scornfully. Big Mars seems bankrupt in their beggared host And faintly through a rusty beaver peeps.","What are you waiting for, lords of France? Those island-bred skeletons, terrified for their bones, are an offensive sight on the morning field. Their ragged banners hang in shreds and the very air of France makes them shiver as it blows by. The god of war looks like a pathetic bankrupt in this miserable army, peeking timidly through a rusty visor. The horsemen stand frozen like candlesticks, torches in their hands. The poor"
"With torch staves in their hand, and their poor jades Lob down their heads, dropping the hides and hips, The gum down-roping from their pale-dead eyes, And in their pale dull mouths the gemeled bit And their executors, the knavish crows, Fly o'er them all, impatient for their hour. Description cannot suit itself in words To demonstrate the life of such a battle","horses droop their heads, their flanks and hips sagging, pus seeping from eyes as pale as death, and in their colorless mouths, the motionless bit is smeared with chewed grass. Meanwhile, their executors Executors: people who dispose of whatever the dead leave behind executors , malicious crows, fly over them, impatient for their moment. It’s beyond the power of words to describe an army so bereft of life."
"They have said their prayers, and they stay for death.","They’ve said their prayers, and now they wait for death."
"Shall we go send them dinners and fresh suits, And give their fasting horses provender, And after fight with them?",Shall we go send them food and fresh clothing and feed their starving horses before we fight them?
"I will the banner from a trumpet take And use it for my haste. Come, come away. The sun is high, and we outwear the day.","I’m just waiting for my flag-bearer. But, never mind, I can’t wait. To the field! I’ll take the banner from a trumpeter and use that. Come, let’s be off! The sun is up and we’re wasting the day!"
Where is the king?,Where is the king?
The king himself is rode to view their battle.,The king rode out alone to view their troops.
Of fighting men they have full threescore thousand.,They have fully sixty thousand fighting men.
"There’s five to one. Besides, they all are fresh.","That’s five to one. Besides, they’re fresh."
"God be wi' you, princes all. I’ll to my charge. If we no more meet till we meet in heaven, Then joyfully, my noble Lord of Bedford, My dear Lord Gloucester, and my good Lord Exeter,","May God’s arm strike on our side! These are frightening odds. God be with all of you, princes. I’ll go and join my men. If we don’t meet again before we meet in heaven, still we’ll meet joyfully. My noble Lord of Bedford, my dear Lord Gloucester, and my good Lord Exeter, and my kind kinsmen, warriors all, adieu."
"Farewell, good Salisbury, and good luck go with thee.","Farewell, good Salisbury; and may good luck go with you."
"Farewell, kind lord. Fight valiantly today. And yet I do thee wrong to mind thee of it, For thou art framed of the firm truth of valor.","Farewell, kind lord. Fight valiantly today. But then I do you wrong to say as much, since you are the very embodiment of bravery."
Princely in both.,"He is as full of courage as of kindness, princely in both."
"Oh, that we now had here But one ten thousand of those men in England That do no work today.","Oh, if only we had with us here ten thousand of those men back home in England who aren’t working today."
"My cousin Westmoreland? No, my fair cousin. If we are marked to die, we are enough To do our country loss; and if to live, The fewer men, the greater share of honor. By Jove, I am not covetous for gold Nor care I who doth feed upon my cost; It yearns me not if men my garments wear; Such outward things dwell not in my desires. I am the most offending soul alive. No, faith, my coz, wish not a man from England. God’s peace, I would not lose so great an honor As one man more, methinks, would share from me, Rather proclaim it, Westmoreland, through my host, That he which hath no stomach to this fight, Let him depart. His passport shall be made, And crowns for convoy put into his purse. That fears his fellowship to die with us. This day is called the feast of Crispian. He that outlives this day and comes safe home, Will stand o' tiptoe when the day is named He that shall see this day, and live old age, Will yearly on the vigil feast his neighbors And say, “Tomorrow is Saint Crispian.” Then will he strip his sleeve and show his scars,","Who wishes that? My cousin Westmoreland? No, my dear cousin. If we are slated to die, the fewer, the better for our country, and if we’re slated to live, the fewer men, the greater the share of honor for each of us. In God’s name, I beg you not to wish for one more man. By God, I am not selfish when it comes to money: I don’t care who eats at my expense. It doesn’t bother me when people borrow my clothing—I don’t care about these concrete things. But if it is a sin to be selfish about honor, I am the most guilty soul alive. No, my cousin, don’t wish that even one man who is now in England were here instead. By God, I wouldn’t lose as much honor as a single man more would cost me, I think—not even if it meant giving up my best hope for victory. Oh, do not wish one more! Instead, make this known throughout the army: whoever has no spirit for this fight, let him depart. He will be given safe conduct and money for his passage home. We would not want to die in the company of a man who fears to die with us. This day is called the Feast of Saint Crispian: he who lives to see this day out and comes home safe will stand tall when this day is named and raise himself up at the mention of Crispian. He who survives this day and lives to see old age shall yearly entertain his neighbors on the eve, saying, “Tomorrow is Saint Crispin’s Day There are actually two different saints honored on this day—Crispin and Crispian. Henry switches back and forth between them in his speech. Saint Crispin’s Day .” He’ll roll up his sleeve and show his scars, saying, “I got these wounds on St. Crispin’s Day.” Old men forget. But these men will remember every detail of what they did today long after they’ve forgotten everything else. And as the wine flows, our names, familiar as household words, will be invoked again: Harry the King, Bedford and Exeter, Warwick and Talbot, Salisbury and Gloucester. Good men will tell their sons this story and the Feast of St. Crispin will never"
"Old men forget; yet all shall be forgot But he’ll remember with advantages What feats he did that day. Then shall our names, Familiar in his mouth as household words, Warwick and Talbot, Salisbury and Gloucester, Be in their flowing cups freshly remembered. This story shall the good man teach his son, And Crispin Crispian shall ne'er go by, But we in it shall be rememberèd— We few, we happy few, we band of brothers; For he today that sheds his blood with me Shall be my brother; be he ne'er so vile, And gentlemen in England now abed Shall think themselves accursed they were not here, And hold their manhoods cheap whiles any speaks That fought with us upon Saint Crispin’s day.","go by, from this day to the end of time, without our being remembered: we few, we happy few, we band of brothers—for whoever sheds his blood with me today shall be my brother. However humble his birth, this day shall grant him nobility. And men back in English now safe in their beds will curse themselves for not having been here, and think less of their own manhood when they listen to the stories of those who fought with us here on St. Crispin’s Day."
"The French are bravely in their battles set, And will with all expedience charge on us.","My sovereign lord, join us quickly: the French are all arrayed in battle formation and will charge us at any moment."
All things are ready if our minds be so.,We’re ready if our minds are ready.
Perish the man whose mind is backward now!,Let any man perish who isn’t ready now!
"Thou dost not wish more help from England, coz?","You don’t wish we had more help from England anymore, cousin?"
"God’s will, my liege, would you and I alone, Without more help, could fight this royal battle!","God Almighty, my liege, I wish that you and I could fight this royal battle all alone."
"Why, now thou hast unwished five thousand men, Which likes me better than to wish us one. Tucket","There! Now you’ve unwished five thousand men, which I prefer to your wishing for one more.—You know your places. God be with you all."
"Once more I come to know of thee, King Harry, If for thy ransom thou wilt now compound, Before thy most assurèd overthrow. Thou needs must be englutted. Besides, in mercy, The constable desires thee thou wilt mind Thy followers of repentance, that their souls May make a peaceful and a sweet retire Must lie and fester.","Once more I come to ask you, King Harry, if you’re ready to negotiate your ransom before your certain defeat. For assuredly, you are so near the abyss that you’re bound to be swallowed up. Moreover, out of mercy, the Constable urges you to remind your men to make their peace with God and repent, so that their souls may depart sweetly and peacefully from these fields where, poor wretches, their bodies will likely fall and fester."
Who hath sent thee now?,Who sent you this time?
The constable of France.,The Constable of France.
"I pray thee, bear my former answer back. Good God, why should they mock poor fellows thus? The man that once did sell the lion’s skin While the beast lived was killed with hunting him. A many of our bodies shall no doubt Shall witness live in brass of this day’s work. And those that leave their valiant bones in France, Dying like men though buried in your dunghills, They shall be famed; for there the sun shall greet them Leaving their earthly parts to choke your clime,","Be good enough to take back the same answer I gave before. Tell them to capture me, then sell my bones. Good God! Why do they mock poor fellows this way? The man that once sold the skin of a lion while the beast still lived died hunting him. A good many of our bodies, I imagine, will end up in English soil. And on their graves, I trust, the story of this day’s work will be written in brass. And those who leave their valiant bones in France, dying like men though buried in your dunghills—they’ll be remembered, too. The sun will rise on them here and draw their glory up to heaven, leaving their mortal remains to choke your land: the smell of rotting flesh will breed a plague in France."
"The smell whereof shall breed a plague in France. Mark, then, abounding valor in our English, That being dead, like to the bullet’s crazing, Killing in relapse of mortality. Let me speak proudly: tell the constable We are but warriors for the working day; Our gayness and our gilt are all besmirched There’s not a piece of feather in our host— Good argument, I hope, we will not fly— And time hath worn us into slovenry. But, by the Mass, our hearts are in the trim, They’ll be in fresher robes, or they will pluck The gay new coats o'er the French soldiers' heads And turn them out of service. If they do this, As, if God please, they shall, my ransom then Come thou no more for ransom, gentle herald. They shall have none, I swear, but these my joints, Which, if they have, as I will leave 'em them, Shall yield them little. Tell the constable.","Then will you notice the abundant valor of our Englishmen, who will embark on a second round of mischief like a ricocheting bullet, killing again as they fall to their deaths. Let me speak proudly: tell the Constable we’re only workaday soldiers. Our finery and shining metal are all rusty from long, painful marches in the rain. There’s not a strand of feather left in our whole army—a good sign, I hope, that we won’t fly away like birds—and time on the field has made us slovenly. But, by God, our hearts are in good shape. And my poor soldiers tell me that before night they’ll be in cleaner clothes. If not, they’ll pull the bright new coats of the French over their heads and send them on their way. If they do this, as they will, God willing, my ransom will soon be raised. Herald, spare yourself. Don’t come again to ask for my ransom, good messenger. I swear the only ransom will be these bones of mine. And if the French get them in the state in which I intend to leave them, they won’t be worth much use to anyone. Tell the constable that."
Thou never shalt hear herald anymore.,"I shall, King Harry. And so farewell. You’ll never hear from the herald again."
I fear thou wilt once more come again for a ransom.,I’m afraid you’ll come to me again for ransom.
"My lord, most humbly on my knee I beg The leading of the vaward.","My lord, most humbly on bended knee I beg you to grant me the leading of the vanguard."
"And how Thou pleasest, God, dispose the day.","Take it, brave York. Now, soldiers, advance. And you, God, bestow today’s victory however it pleases You."
"Yield, cur.","Surrender, dog!"
Je pense que vous êtes gentilhomme de bonne qualité.,(speaking in French) You seem like a gentleman of high rank.
Qualtitie calmie custure me. Art thou a gentleman? What is thy name? Discuss.,Qualtitie calmie custure Pistol is speaking nonsense as though it were a real for eign tongue. custure me! Are you a gentleman? What is your name? Expound.
Ô Seigneur Dieu!,"(speaking in French) Oh, God above!"
"O Seigneur Dew should be a gentleman. Perpend my words, O Seigneur Dew, and mark: O Seigneur Dew, thou diest on point of fox, except, O Seigneur, thou do give to me egregious ransom.","This man, one O. Signieur Dew Pistol misunder stands the French man to be saying his name is “O. ignieur Dew.” Be cause “seigneur” means “lord,” Pis ol thinks his pris oner is a nobleman. O. Signieur Dew , must be a gentleman. Consider my words, O. Signieur Dew, and take note: O. Signieur Dew, you’ll be killed with my sword unless you pay me an absurd amount of money for your ransom."
"Ô, prenez miséricorde! Ayez pitié de moi!","(speaking in French) Oh, have mercy! Take pity on me!"
"Moy shall not serve. I will have forty moys, or I will fetch thy rim out at thy throat in drops of crimson blood.","(mistaking moi, the French word for “me,” as a unit of money) One moy is not enough. I must have forty moys, or I will reach into your throat and pull out some moys, along with a lot of blood."
Est-il impossible d'Échapper la force de ton bras?,(speaking in French) Is it impossible to escape your mighty arm?
"Brass, cur? Thou damned and luxurious mountain goat, offer’st me brass?","(mishearing bras, the French word for “arm,” as “brass”) Brass, you dog! You damned lazy mountain goat, do you offer me brass?"
"Ô, pardonnez-moi!","(speaking in French) Oh, spare me!"
"Say’st thou me so? Is that a ton of moys?—Come hither, boy. Ask me this slave in French what is his name.","Really? Is that a lot of moys? Come over here, boy and ask this slave in French what his name is."
Écoutez. Comment êtes-vous appelé?,"(speaking in French) Look, what’s your name?"
Monsieur le Fer.,(speaking in French) Monsieur le Fer.
He says his name is Master Fer.,He says his name is Master Fer.
"Master Fer. I’ll fer him, and firk him, and ferret him. Discuss the same in French unto him.","Master Fer! I’ll fer him, and firk Firk = “beat” firk him, and ferret Ferret = “tear” ferret him: expound as much to him in French."
"I do not know the French for “fer,” and “ferret,” and “firk.”","I do not know the French for “fer,” and “ferret,” and “firk.”"
"Bid him prepare, for I will cut his throat.","Tell him to prepare himself for death, for I’m going to cut his throat."
"(to the BOY) Que dit-il, monsieur?","(speaking in French, to the BOY) What is he saying, sir?"
"Il me commande à vous dire que vous faites vous prêt, car ce soldat ici est disposé tout à cette heure de couper votre gorge.","(speaking in French) He told me to tell you to prepare to die, for this soldier here is of a mind to cut your throat without delay."
"Owy, cuppele gorge, permafoy, peasant, unless thou give me crowns, brave crowns, or mangled shalt thou be by this my sword.","(trying to speak French) Yes, cut your throat, by God, you peasant, unless you give me gold coins, good gold coins. If not, you’ll be mangled by this sword of mine."
"Ô, je vous supplie, pour l'amour de Dieu, me pardoner. Je suis gentilhomme de bonne maison. Gardez ma vie, et je vous donnerai deux cents écus","(speaking in French) Oh, I beseech you, for the love of God, spare me! I am a gentleman of good family: spare me and I will give you two hundred écus."
What are his words?,What does he say?
"He prays you to save his life. He is a gentleman of a good house, and for his ransom he will give you two hundred crowns.","He begs you to spare his life. He is a gentleman of a good family, and for his ransom, he will give you two hundred crowns."
"Tell him my fury shall abate, and I the crowns will take.","Tell him my fury will abate, and I’ll take the crowns."
"Petit monsieur, que dit-il?","(speaking in French) Young sir, what does he say?"
"Encore qu'il est contre son jurement de pardoner aucun 									prisonnier; néanmoins, pour les écus que vous lui avez promis, 									il est content à vous donner la liberté, le franchisement.","(speaking in French) Once again, that it would be breaking his oath to pardon any prisoner. Nevertheless, for the crowns that you’ve promised him, he is willing to give you freedom, liberty."
"Sur mes genoux je vous donne mille remercîments, et je 									m'estime heureux que j'ai tombé entre les mains d'un 									chevalier, je pense, le plus brave, vaillant, et très distingué 									seigneur d'Angleterre.","(speaking in French) On my knees I thank you again and again. And I consider myself fortunate to have fallen into the hands of a knight—to my mind, the noblest, most valiant, and most distinguished gentleman of England."
"Expound unto me, boy.","Explain, boy."
"He gives you upon his knees a thousand thanks, and he esteems himself happy that he hath fall'n into the hands of one, as he thinks, the most brave, valorous, and thrice- worthy seigneur of England.","He thanks you on his knees many times and considers himself fortunate to have fallen into the hands of one, as he thinks, who is the bravest, most valorous, and thrice-worthy gentleman of England."
"As I suck blood, I will some mercy show. Follow me.","As I get to leech him, I will show some mercy. Follow me."
Suivez-vous le grand capitaine.,(speaking in French) Follow the mighty captain.
"I did never know so full a voice issue from so empty a heart. But the saying is true: “The empty vessel makes the greatest sound.” Bardolph and Nym had ten times more valor than this roaring devil i' th' old play, that everyone may pare his nails with a wooden dagger, and they are both hanged, and so would this be if he durst steal any thing adventurously. I must stay with the lackeys with the luggage of our camp. The French might have a good prey of us if he knew of it, for there is none to guard it but boys.","I never heard so loud a voice issue from such an empty heart. It’s true what they say: “The empty vessel makes the greatest sound.” Bardolph and Nym had ten times more courage than this roaring stage villain, whose nails any Joe could cut with a wooden dagger, but they are both hanged. So would this man if he had the nerve to steal anything bravely. I have to stay with the servants, who are with our camp’s luggage. We’re sitting ducks for the French, if they only knew it, for there is no one guarding it but boys."
Ô diable!,"O, hell!"
"Ô seigneur! Le jour est perdu, tout est erdu!","O Lord, the day is lost! All is lost!"
"Mort de ma vie, all is confounded, all! Reproach and everlasting shame","Dear God! All is lost, all! Regret and everlasting shame sit on our helmets, mocking us."
Ô méchante Fortune! Do not run away.,What stinking luck! Do not run away.
"Why, all our ranks are broke.",Our men have all broken ranks.
O perdurable shame! Let’s stab ourselves.,"O, everlasting shame! Let’s fall on our swords. Are these the wretches that we threw dice for?"
Is this the king we sent to for his ransom?,Is this the king we offered to ransom?
"Shame, and eternal shame, nothing but shame! Let us die. In once more! Back again! And he that will not follow Bourbon now, Like a base pander hold the chamber door, Whilst by a slave, no gentler than my dog, His fairest daughter is contaminate.","Shame, eternal shame, and nothing but shame! Let us die honorably. Back into the fray once again! He who will not follow me now, let him depart and stand in the doorway like a pimp, cap in hand, while some slave, no nobler than my dog, violates his daughter."
"Disorder, that hath spoiled us, friend us now.",Maybe we can benefit from the same chaos that has defeated us. Let’s go offer up our lives en masse.
"We are enough yet living in the field To smother up the English in our throngs, If any order might be thought upon.",There are enough of us still alive in the field to overcome the English with our numbers if we could just restore some kind of order.
The devil take order now! I’ll to the throng.,The hell with order! I’m going back into battle. Let life be short so that shame won’t last too long.
"Well have we done, thrice-valiant countrymen, But all’s not done. Yet keep the French the field.","We have done well, my valiant countrymen. But it’s not over. The French are still fighting."
The duke of York commends him to your Majesty.,The duke of York sends your Majesty his respects.
"Lives he, good uncle? Thrice within this hour From helmet to the spur, all blood he was.","Is he still alive, good uncle? Three times in an hour I saw him down, and three times up again and fighting. He was covered with blood from his helmet to his spurs."
"In which array, brave soldier, doth he lie, Larding the plain, and by his bloody side, Yoke-fellow to his honor-owing wounds, Suffolk first died, and York, all haggled over, Comes to him where in gore he lay insteeped And takes him by the beard, kisses the gashes That bloodily did yawn upon his face. My soul shall thine keep company to heaven. Tarry, sweet soul, for mine; then fly abreast, As in this glorious and well-foughten field We kept together in our chivalry.” He smiled me in the face, raught me his hand, And with a feeble grip, says “Dear my lord, Commend my service to my sovereign.” So did he turn, and over Suffolk’s neck","The valiant soldier is still dressed like that, lying on the ground, drenching the field with his blood. By his side lies the noble earl of Suffolk, York’s comrade and equal in brave wounds. Suffolk died first, and York, cut to pieces, came to him where he lay in his blood and took him by the face, kissing his gashes. He cried out, “Wait for me, dear cousin. My soul will keep yours company on the way to heaven. Wait for mine, sweet soul. We’ll fly there side by side, just as we stood together as brother-knights in this glorious and well-fought battle!” At this, I went to comfort him. He smiled at me close, gave me his hand, gripping me feebly, and said, “My dear lord, commend my service to my king.” With that, he turned and threw his wounded arm around Suffolk’s neck and kissed his lips. And so,"
"And so, espoused to death, with blood he sealed A testament of noble-ending love. The pretty and sweet manner of it forced Those waters from me which I would have stopped, And all my mother came into mine eyes And gave me up to tears.","married to death, he sealed a testament of love that even ended in nobility. The fineness of the moment moved me to tears. I tried to hold them back, but wept like a mother."
"I blame you not, For, hearing this, I must perforce compound","I don’t blame you. Just listening, I have to school my misty eyes, or they will brim over."
"But hark, what new alarum is this same? The French have reinforced their scattered men. Then every soldier kill his prisoners. Give the word through.",But listen! What new battle is this? The French have reinforced their scattered men. Then every soldier must kill his prisoners. Spread the word.
"Kill the poys and the luggage! 'Tis expressly against the law of arms. 'Tis as arrant a piece of knavery, mark you now, as can be offert, in your conscience now, is it not?","To kill the boys with the luggage! It’s expressly against the rules of combat. It’s as complete a work of villainy as any that could be thought up. Tell me, don’t you think so?"
"'Tis certain there’s not a boy left alive, and the cowardly rascals that ran from the battle ha' done this slaughter. Besides, they have burned and carried away all that was in the king’s tent, wherefore the king, most worthily, hath caused every soldier to cut his prisoner’s throat. Oh, ’tis a gallant king!","There’s certainly not a boy left alive, and it was done by the cowardly rascals who were running from the battle. On top of this, they’ve either burned or carried away everything that was in the king’s tent. So the king has quite rightly ordered that every prisoner’s throat be cut. Oh, he’s a gallant king!"
"Ay, he was porn at Monmouth, Captain Gower. What call you the town’s name where Alexander the Pig was born?","Yes, he was born at Monmouth, Captain Gower. What is the name of the town where Alexander the Pig Fluellen pronounces p for b he means “big.” Pig was born?"
Alexander the Great.,Alexander the Great.
"Why, I pray you, is not “pig” great? The pig, or the great, or the mighty, or the huge, or the magnanimous are all one reckonings, save the phrase is a little variations.","And is “pig” not the same as “great,” may I ask? The pig or the mighty or the huge or the magnanimous—they all mean the same thing, with some variation."
"I think Alexander the Great was born in Macedon. His father was called Philip of Macedon, as I take it.","I think Alexander the Great was born in Macedon. His father was Philip of Macedon, as I remember."
"I think it is in Macedon where Alexander is porn. I tell you, Captain, if you look in the maps of the 'orld, I warrant you shall find, in the comparisons between Macedon and Monmouth, that the situations, look you, is both alike.","I think that Macedon is indeed where Alexander was born. I tell you, Captain, if you look at a map of the world, I’ll bet you will find, comparing Macedon and Monmouth, that the situations, see, are very similar."
"There is a river in Macedon, and there is also, moreover, a river at Monmouth. It is called Wye at Monmouth, but it is out of my prains what is the name of the other river. But ’tis all one; ’tis alike as my fingers is to my fingers, and there is salmons in both. If you mark Alexander’s life well, Harry of Monmouth’s life is come after it indifferent well, for there is figures in all things. Alexander, God knows and you know, in his rages and his furies and his wraths and his cholers and his moods and his displeasures and his indignations, and also being a little intoxicates in his prains, did, in his ales and his angers, look you, kill his best friend, Cleitus.","There is a river in Macedon, and there is likewise a river in Monmouth. The river in Monmouth is called Wye, but the name of the other river has gone out of my head. Nevertheless, it’s all one—the two rivers are as alike as my fingers are to my fingers, and there are salmon in both. If you look closely at Alexander’s life, Harry of Monmouth’s stands up fairly well by comparison—for there are analogies in everything. Alexander, God knows and you know, in his rages and his furies and his wraths and his angers and his moods and his displeasures and his indignations, and also being a little the worse for drink, killed his best friend Cleitus in a drunken rage, see."
Our king is not like him in that. He never killed any of his friends.,Our king is not like him in that respect: he never killed any of his friends.
"It is not well done, mark you now, to take the tales out of my mouth ere it is made and finished. I speak but in the figures and comparisons of it. As Alexander killed his friend Cleitus, being in his ales and his cups, so also Harry Monmouth, being in his right wits and his good judgments, turned away the fat knight with the great-belly doublet; he was full of jests, and gipes and knaveries, and mocks—I have forgot his name.","It is not courteous, you know, to assume you know my meaning before I’ve finished talking. I’m speaking purely in analogies and comparisons. Just as Alexander killed his friend Cleitus when he was drinking, so Harry Monmouth, having come to his senses and acquired good judgment, turned away the fat knight in the oversized doublet: the man was full of jests and japes and pranks and mocks. I have forgotten his name."
Sir John Falstaff.,Sir John Falstaff.
Monmouth.,"That’s the one. I tell you, there are good men born at Monmouth."
Here comes his Majesty.,Here comes his Majesty.
"I was not angry since I came to France Until this instant. Take a trumpet, herald. If they will fight with us, bid them come down, Or void the field. They do offend our sight. If they’ll do neither, we will come to them And make them skirr away as swift as stones Besides, we’ll cut the throats of those we have, And not a man of them that we shall take Shall taste our mercy. Go and tell them so.","I was not angry since I came to France until this instant. Take a trumpet, herald. Ride out to the horsemen on that hill. If they seek battle with us, have them come down or else clear the field. The sight of them is offensive. If they’ll do neither, we’ll come to them and make them fly like stones shot from powerful slings. We’ll also cut the throats of any prisoners we have. Not a man of them that we shall take shall know our mercy. Go and tell them this."
"Here comes the herald of the French, my liege.","Here comes the herald of the French, my liege."
His eyes are humbler than they used to be.,He looks humbler than he used to.
"How now, what means this, herald? Know’st thou not That I have fined these bones of mine for ransom? Com’st thou again for ransom?","Well? What is the meaning of this, herald? Don’t you know that I have offered these bones of mine for ransom? Are you coming again for ransom?"
"No, great king. That we may wander o'er this bloody field To book our dead and then to bury them; To sort our nobles from our common men, For many of our princes—woe the while!— So do our vulgar drench their peasant limbs In blood of princes, and the wounded steeds Fret fetlock deep in gore, and with wild rage Yerk out their armèd heels at their dead masters, To view the field in safety and dispose Of their dead bodies.","No, great king. I come to ask you out of charity to let us wander over this bloody field to record the numbers of our dead and bury them, separating our nobles from the common men, for many of our princes—alas!—lie drowned and soaked in the blood of mercenary soldiers. Likewise, our common men lie drenched in the blood of princes, and their wounded steeds, ankle-deep in gore, struggle and, raging wildly, stamp on their dead masters with their hooves, killing them a second time. Oh, give us permission, great king, to search the field in safety and dispose of our dead bodies."
"I tell thee truly, herald, I know not if the day be ours or no, And gallop o'er the field.","I’ll be honest with you, herald: I don’t even know who won the battle. I still see many of your horsemen galloping across the field."
The day is yours.,You won it.
"Praised be God, and not our strength, for it! What is this castle called that stands hard by?","God, not our strength, be praised! What is the name of the castle that stands over there?"
They call it Agincourt.,Agincourt.
"Then call we this the field of Agincourt, Fought on the day of Crispin Crispianus.","Then we’ll call this the Battle of Agincourt, fought on the day of Crispin Crispianus."
"Your grandfather of famous memory, an’t please your Majesty, and your great-uncle Edward the Plack Prince of Wales, as I have read in the chronicles, fought a most prave pattle here in France.","If I may say so, your Majesty, your famous grandfather and your great-uncle Edward, the Black Prince of Wales—or so I’ve read in the history books—fought a very brave battle here in France."
"They did, Fluellen.","They did, Fluellen."
"Your Majesty says very true. If your Majesties is remembered of it, the Welshmen did good service in a garden where leeks did grow, wearing leeks in their Monmouth caps, which, your Majesty know, to this hour is an honorable badge of the service. And I do believe your Majesty takes no scorn to wear the leek upon Saint Tavy’s day.","Your Majesty is quite right. If your Majesties recall it, the Welsh fought very valiantly in a garden where there were leeks growing, wearing leeks in their Monmouth caps which, your Majesty knows, is to this day a badge of honorable military service. I do believe your Majesty takes no shame in wearing the leek on Saint Davy’s Day."
"For I am Welsh, you know, good countryman.","I wear it with pride, for I am Welsh you know, good countryman."
"All the water in Wye cannot wash your Majesty’s Welsh plood out of your pody, I can tell you that: God pless it and preserve it as long as it pleases his Grace and his Majesty too.","All the water in Wye cannot wash your Majesty’s Welsh blood out of your body. I can tell you that. God bless it and preserve it, as long as it pleases his Grace, and his Majesty, too!"
"Thanks, good my countryman.","Thanks, my good countryman."
"By Jeshu, I am your Majesty’s countryman, I care not who know it. I will confess it to all the 'orld. I need not to be ashamed of your Majesty, praised be God, so long as your Majesty is an honest man.","By Jesus, I am your Majesty’s countryman, and I don’t care who knows it. I will confess it to all the world. I needn’t be ashamed of your Majesty, God be praised, so long as your Majesty is an honest man."
God keep me so.—Our heralds go with him. Bring me just notice of the numbers dead On both our parts. (points to WILLIAMS) Call yonder fellow hither.,"God keep me so.—Heralds, go with him. Bring me an exact report of the number of dead on both sides. (pointing to WILLIAMS) Tell that fellow over there to come here."
"Soldier, you must come to the king.","Soldier, you must come to the king."
"Soldier, why wear’st thou that glove in thy cap?","Soldier, why are you wearing that glove in your cap?"
"An’t please your Majesty, ’tis the gage of one that I should fight withal, if he be alive.","If it pleases your Majesty, it is the token of a man I must fight with, if he’s still alive."
An Englishman?,An Englishman?
"An ’t please your Majesty, a rascal that swaggered with me last night, who, if alive and ever dare to challenge this glove, I have sworn to take him a box o' th' ear, or if I can see my glove in his cap, which he swore, as he was a soldier, he would wear if alive, I will strike it out soundly.","If I may say so, your Majesty, he is a rascal who quarreled with me last night, and who, if he lives and ever dares to challenge this glove, will get a box on the ear from me. Or, if I see him wearing my glove in his cap, which he swore as a soldier he would wear if he lived, I will knock it off his head."
"What think you, Captain Fluellen, is it fit this soldier keep his oath?","What do you say, Captain Fluellen? Should this soldier keep his oath?"
"He is a craven and a villain else, an ’t please your Majesty, in my conscience.","If I may say so, your Majesty, as I see it he would be a coward and a villain not to."
"It may be his enemy is a gentleman of great sort, quite from the answer of his degree.","It may be that his antagonist is a gentleman of very high degree, quite outside of his own sphere."
"Though he be as good a gentleman as the devil is, as Lucifer and Beelzebub himself, it is necessary, look your Grace, that he keep his vow and his oath. If he be perjured, see you now, his reputation is as arrant a villain and a Jack Sauce as ever his black shoe trod upon God’s ground and His earth, in my conscience, la.","Even if he were as important a man as the devil—as Lucifer or Beelzebub himself—he’s required, see, your Grace, to keep his vow. If he backs down, he’ll become as notorious a villain and as saucy a Jack as ever walked on God’s earth, in my opinion."
"Then keep thy vow, sirrah, when thou meet’st the fellow.","Then keep your vow, fellow, when you meet the man."
"So I will, my liege, as I live.","So I will, my liege. I swear on my life."
Who serv’st thou under?,Whom do you serve under?
"Under Captain Gower, my liege.","Under Captain Gower, my liege."
"Gower is a good captain, and is good knowledge and literatured in the wars.","Gower is a good captain, and is well versed and well read in the wars."
"Call him hither to me, soldier.","Have him come to me here, soldier."
"I will, my liege.","I will, my liege."
"Here, Fluellen, wear thou this favor for me and stick it in thy cap. (gives WILLIAMS's glove to FLUELLEN) When Alençon and myself were down together, I plucked this glove from his helm. If any man challenge this, he is a friend to Alençon and an enemy to our person. If thou encounter any such, apprehend him, an thou dost me love.","Here, Fluellen, stick this in your cap. (gives WILLIAMS's glove to FLUELLEN) When Alençon and I went down together, I plucked this glove from his helmet. If any man challenges it, he is a friend to Alençon and an enemy to me. If you encounter such a man, arrest him and prove your loyalty to me."
"Your Grace does me as great honors as can be desired in the hearts of his subjects. I would fain see the man that has but two legs that shall find himself aggrieved at this glove, that is all; but I would fain see it once, an please God of his Grace that I might see.","Your Grace does me as great an honor as could be wished by any of his subjects. I’d like to see the man with two legs who takes offense at this glove, that’s all! Just once I’d like to see it, if it please God to grant me that."
Know’st thou Gower?,Do you know Captain Gower?
"He is my dear friend, an please you.","He is my dear friend, your Majesty."
"Pray thee, go seek him, and bring him to my tent.","Go find him, please, and bring him to my tent."
I will fetch him.,I’ll fetch him.
Follow Fluellen closely at the heels. The glove which I have given him for a favor May haply purchase him a box o' th' ear. It is the soldier’s. I by bargain should,"My Lord of Warwick and my brother Gloucester, follow Fluellen at a close distance. The glove which I have given him to wear may possibly win him a box on the ear. It belongs to the soldier I was just talking to. According to an agreement, I should wear it myself. Follow Fluellen, cousin Warwick, and if the soldier strikes him—and I would think from his forthright manner that he’ll keep his word—some mischief may arise as a result. I know Fluellen to be very conscious of his honor and quick to anger, hot as gunpowder and"
"If that the soldier strike him, as I judge By his blunt bearing he will keep his word, Some sudden mischief may arise of it, For I do know Fluellen valiant And quickly will return an injury. Follow, and see there be no harm between them. —Go you with me, uncle of Exeter.","likely to return any injury promptly. Follow and see to it that nothing serious happens between them. You come with me, uncle of Exeter."
"I warrant it is to knight you, Captain.","I’m sure it is to knight you, Captain."
"God’s will and His pleasure, Captain, I beseech you now, come apace to the king. There is more good toward you peradventure than is in your knowledge to dream of.","As it is God’s will and pleasure, Captain, I entreat you to come quickly to the king. There is more good fortune in store for you than you could ever imagine."
"Sir, know you this glove?","Sir, do you recognize this glove?"
Know the glove! I know the glove is a glove.,Know the glove! I know the glove is a glove.
"I know this, and thus I challenge it. (strikes him)","Well, I recognize this one (indicates the glove FLUELLEN wears in his cap), and I hereby challenge you. (strikes him)"
"'Sblood, an arrant traitor as any ’s in the universal world, or in France, or in England!",Good God! As absolute a traitor as any in the whole entire world—or even France or England!
"How now, sir? You villain!","What is this, you villain!"
Do you think I’ll be forsworn?,Do you think I’d break my oath?
"Stand away, Captain Gower. I will give treason his payment into plows, I warrant you.","Stand aside, Captain Gower. I’ll reward treason with blows, I promise you."
I am no traitor.,I’m not a traitor.
"That’s a lie in thy throat.—I charge you in his Majesty’s name, apprehend him. He’s a friend of the Duke Alençon’s.",An infamous lie! I accuse you in the name of the king. Arrest him: he’s a friend of the duke of Alençon’s.
"How now, how now, what’s the matter?","Now, now! What’s all this? What’s going on?"
"My Lord of Warwick, here is, praised be God for it, a most contagious treason come to light, look you, as you shall desire in a summer’s day.","My Lord of Warwick, a most corrupt treason—God be praised for it!—has been discovered, as plain as any you’d hope to see on a summer’s day."
Here is his Majesty.,Here is his Majesty.
"How now, what’s the matter?","Well, now! What’s the matter?"
"My liege, here is a villain and a traitor, that, look your Grace, has struck the glove which your Majesty is take out of the helmet of Alençon.","My liege, this man is a villain and a traitor, who—see, your Grace—has struck the glove which your Majesty took from Alençon’s helmet."
"My liege, this was my glove; here is the fellow of it. And he that I gave it to in change promised to wear it in his cap. I promised to strike him if he did. I met this man with my glove in his cap, and I have been as good as my word.","My liege, this was my glove. Here is its mate, and the man I gave it to promised to wear it in his cap, and I promised to strike him if he did. I met this man with my glove in his cap, and I have been as good as my word."
"Your Majesty, hear now, saving your Majesty’s manhood, what an arrant, rascally, beggarly, lousy knave it is. I hope your Majesty is pear me testimony and witness, and will avouchment that this is the glove of Alençon that your Majesty is give me, in your conscience now.","Your Majesty, see here—if it won’t offend your Grace—what a complete, rascally, beggarly, lousy rat this is. I hope your Majesty will, in all good conscience, bear me out and vouch for the fact that this is the glove of Alençon and that your Majesty gave it to me."
"'Twas I indeed thou promised’st to strike, And thou hast given me most bitter terms.","Give me your glove, soldier: look, here is its mate. It was I, in fact, whom you promised to strike. And you spoke of me in the harshest terms."
"An please your Majesty, let his neck answer for it, if there is any martial law in the world.","If it pleases your Majesty, let his neck pay the price, if there is any martial law in the world."
How canst thou make me satisfaction?,How can you square things with me?
"All offenses, my lord, come from the heart. Never came any from mine that might offend your Majesty.","All offenses come from the heart, my lord, and nothing intended to offend your Majesty ever came from mine."
It was ourself thou didst abuse.,You abused me to my face.
"Your Majesty came not like yourself. You appeared to me but as a common man. Witness the night, your garments, your lowliness. And what your Highness suffered under that shape, I beseech you take it for your own fault and not mine, for, had you been as I took you for, I made no offense. Therefore, I beseech your Highness pardon me.","Your Majesty didn’t present yourself as the king. You represented yourself as just a common man. Consider the time of night, what you were wearing, and how ordinary you looked. Anything your Highness suffered in that disguise, I beg you to see it as your own fault and not mine, because if you’d been what I took you for, there would have been no offense. Therefore, I beg your Highness, pardon me."
"And give it to this fellow.—Keep it, fellow, And wear it for an honor in thy cap Till I do challenge it.—Give him the crowns. —And, captain, you must needs be friends with him.","Here, uncle Exeter, fill this glove with gold coins and give it to this fellow. Keep it, my friend, and wear it as a badge of honor in your cap until I challenge it.—Give him the money.—And you, Captain, must make it up with him."
"By this day and this light, the fellow has mettle enough in his belly.—Hold, there is twelve pence for you, and I pray you to serve God and keep you out of prawls and prabbles and quarrels and dissensions, and I warrant you it is the better for you.","By this day and this light, the fellow is certainly brave. Here, twelve pence for you. I urge you to serve God and stay out of brawls and dust-ups and quarrels and disputes. I promise it will be better for you if you do."
I will none of your money.,I’ll have none of your money.
"It is with a good will. I can tell you it will serve you to mend your shoes. Come, wherefore should you be so pashful? Your shoes is not so good. 'Tis a good silling, I warrant you, or I will change it.","It’s meant in good will. I tell you, you can use it to get your shoes fixed. Come, why be so hesitant? Your shoes are in pretty bad shape. It’s a good shilling, I promise you. If not, I’ll get another one for you."
"Now, herald, are the dead numbered?","Now, herald, have the dead been counted?"
Here is the number of the slaughtered French.,Here is the count of the slaughtered French.
"What prisoners of good sort are taken, uncle?","What prisoners of rank have been taken, uncle?"
"Charles, duke of Orléans, nephew to the king; John, duke of Bourbon, and Lord Bouciqualt. Full fifteen hundred, besides common men.","Charles duke of Orléans, nephew to the king; John duke of Bourbon, and Lord Bouciqualt: of other lords and barons, knights and squires, a full fifteen hundred, besides common men."
"This note doth tell me of ten thousand French That in the field lie slain. Of princes in this number And nobles bearing banners, there lie dead Of knights, esquires, and gallant gentlemen, Eight thousand and four hundred, of the which, Five hundred were but yesterday dubbed knights. So that in these ten thousand they have lost, The rest are princes, barons, lords, knights, squires, And gentlemen of blood and quality. The names of those their nobles that lie dead: Charles Delabreth, high constable of France; The Master of the Crossbows, Lord Rambures;","This paper tells me of ten thousand Frenchmen who lie dead on the battlefield. Among them are one hundred twenty-six princes and standard-bearing nobles. Add to these eight thousand four hundred knights, squires, and brave gentlemen, five hundred of whom were given the title of knight only yesterday. Among the ten thousand the French have lost only sixteen hundred are mercenaries. The rest of the dead are princes, barons, lords, knights, squires, and gentlemen of birth and rank. The names of those of their nobles that lie dead: Charles Delabreth, high constable of France; Jaques of Chatillon, admiral of France; the master of the crossbows, Lord Rambures; Great Master of France, the brave Sir Guichard Dolphin, John duke of Alençon, Anthony duke of Brabant, the brother of the duke of Burgundy, and Edward duke of Bar. Of brave earls, Grandpré and Roussi, Fauconberg and Foix, Beaumont and Marle, Vaudemont and Lestrale. Here was a"
"Great Master of France, the brave Sir Guichard Dauphin; John, duke of Alençon; Anthony, duke of Brabant, The brother of the duke of Burgundy, Grandpré and Roussi, Faulconbridge and Foix, Beaumont and Marle, Vaudemont and Lestrale. Here was a royal fellowship of death. Where is the number of our English dead?",royal fellowship of death! Where is the number of our English dead?
"Sir Richard Ketly, Davy Gam, esquire; None else of name, and of all other men But five and twenty. O God, thy arm was here, And not to us but to thy arm alone But in plain shock and even play of battle, Was ever known so great and little loss On one part and on th' other? Take it, God, For it is none but thine.","Edward the duke of York, the earl of Suffolk, Sir Richard Ketly, Davy Gam, esquire. No one else of name, and only twenty-five other men. Oh, God, your power was with us. What happened here is your doing alone, not ours. When was there ever before so great a loss on one side and so little on the other, in the ordinary and equal clash of battle? Take credit, God, for it is no one’s doing but yours."
'Tis wonderful.,It’s unbelievable.
"Come, go we in procession to the village, And be it death proclaimèd through our host To boast of this or take that praise from God Which is His only.","Come, let’s make a solemn procession to the village. And let it be proclaimed throughout our army that it shall be a hanging offense for anyone to boast of this or take from God the credit that belongs to Him alone."
"Is it not lawful, an please your Majesty, to tell how many is killed?","If it pleases your Majesty, isn’t it permissible to mention the number of casualties?"
"Yes, Captain, but with this acknowledgement: That God fought for us.","Yes, Captain, but with this acknowledgement—that God fought for us."
"Yes, my conscience, He did us great good.","Yes, I truly think He did great good."
"Let there be sung Non nobis and Te Deum, The dead with charity enclosed in clay, And then to Calais, and to England then, Where ne'er from France arrived more happy men.","We’ll perform all the holy rites. Let Non nobis and Te Deum be sung, and let the dead be buried properly. Then on to Calais and from there to England. There have never been more fortunate men than we to return from France."
"Vouchsafe to those that have not read the story That I may prompt them; and of such as have, I humbly pray them to admit th' excuse Of time, of numbers, and due course of things, Be here presented. Now we bear the king Toward Calais. Grant him there. There seen, Heave him away upon your wingèd thoughts Athwart the sea. Behold, the English beach Whose shouts and claps outvoice the deep-mouthed sea, Which like a mighty whiffler 'fore the king Seems to prepare his way. So let him land, And solemnly see him set on to London. You may imagine him upon Blackheath, Where that his lords desire him to have borne His bruisèd helmet and his bended sword Before him through the city. He forbids it, Giving full trophy, signal, and ostent Quite from himself, to God. But now behold, In the quick forge and workinghouse of thought, How London doth pour out her citizens. Like to the senators of th' antique Rome, With the plebeians swarming at their heels, Go forth and fetch their conquering Caesar in— As, by a lower but loving likelihood,","Allow me to fill in the gaps for those of you who have not read this story. As for those who have, I beg you to excuse the gaps in time, and the many people and things that cannot be represented here in all their magnitude and proper form. Let’s bring the king now to Calais. Imagine him there and, having seen him there, haul him back across the sea on the wings of your imagination. There’s the coast of England: see how the sea seems to be fenced in by the men and wives and boys who line the shore, their shouts and wild applause drowning out the deep roar of the surf. As the king’s ship draws near, the very ocean is like a man running before the king, preparing his way. Let’s have him land and solemnly proceed to London. Thoughts work so quickly that even now you can imagine him on Blackheath, where his lords suggest that he should carry his battle-scarred sword and helmet on a procession through the city. He refuses, as he is free of vanity and self-serving pride and ascribes all the glory and responsibility for victory to God. Now in the factory of thought, create the image of all London pouring forth into the streets. Picture the mayor and all his brother citizens dressed in their best as they go forth like senators of ancient Rome to welcome home their conquering Caesar. Imagine if our own queen’s general returned from Ireland, having stamped out the rebellion there, as we hope he does very soon, how many people would leave the city to come welcome him. Even more people than that welcomed Harry home,"
"As in good time he may, from Ireland coming, Bringing rebellion broached on his sword, How many would the peaceful city quit To welcome him! Much more, and much more cause, (As yet the lamentation of the French Invites the king of England’s stay at home; The emperor’s coming in behalf of France To order peace between them) and omit Till Harry’s back return again to France. There must we bring him, and myself have played The interim, by remembering you ’tis past. Then brook abridgment, and your eyes advance","and they had even more reason. Let’s put him now in London, since France’s period of mourning requires the king of England to stay home. Imagine a visit of the Holy Roman Emperor, working on France’s behalf. He wants to bring about a peace between the two countries. Skip over all the particularities between then and Harry’s return to France. There we must place him, and I myself have covered the interim period by reminding you that it has taken place. So, keeping this omission in mind, immediately return to France, your eyes following the path of your thoughts."
"Nay, that’s right. But why wear you your leek today? Saint Davy’s day is past.","Yes, that’s true, but why are you wearing your leek today? Saint Davy’s Day has passed."
"There is occasions and causes why and wherefore in all things. I will tell you as my friend, Captain Gower. The rascally, scald, beggarly, lousy, pragging knave, Pistol, which you and yourself and all the world know to be no petter than a fellow, look you now, of no merits, he is come to me and prings me pread and salt yesterday, look you, and bid me eat my leek. It was in place where I could not breed no contention with him, but I will be so bold as to wear it in my cap till I see him once again, and then I will tell him a little piece of my desires.","There are reasons and causes why and how in everything. I’ll tell you as my friend, Captain Gower: that rascally, mean, beggarly, lousy, bragging Pistol, whom you and yourself and all the world know to be no better than a peasant—see—with no good qualities at all: he came to me yesterday and brought me bread and salt and told me to eat my leek. We were somewhere where I couldn’t pick a fight with him, but I’ve decided to wear it in my cap until I see him again, whereupon I’ll give him a little piece of my mind."
"Why, here he comes, swelling like a turkey-cock.","And here he comes, puffing himself up like a turkey."
"'Tis no matter for his swellings, nor his turkey-cocks.— God pless you.","Never mind his puffings and his turkeys. God bless you, Ensign Pistol! You lousy, rotten, villain, God bless you!"
"Ha, art thou bedlam? Dost thou thirst, base Trojan, to have me fold up Parca’s fatal web? Hence. I am qualmish at the smell of leek.","Are you mad? Do you want me to cut your life short, you deceiving lowlife? Away! The smell of leek turns my stomach."
"I peseech you heartily, scurvy, lousy knave, at my desires, and my requests, and my petitions, to eat, look you, this leek. Because, look you, you do not love it, nor your affections and your appetites and your digestions does not agree with it, I would desire you to eat it.","I wonder if you’d be so good, you lousy, rotten villain, to grant my wish and my request and gratify me, see, by eating this leek. I’d like you to, see, because you don’t like it, and because it isn’t to your taste, and because it doesn’t agree with you."
Not for Cadwallader and all his goats.,Not for Cadwallader and all his goats.
"There is one goat for you. (strikes him) Will you be so good, scald knave, as eat it?","Here’s a goat for you. (strikes him with a club) Will you be good enough to eat it, mangy rascal?"
"Base Trojan, thou shalt die.","Dissolute lowlife, you shall die."
"You say very true, scald knave, when God’s will is. I will desire you to live in the meantime and eat your victuals. Come, there is sauce for it. (strikes him) You called me yesterday “mountain squire,” but I will make you today a squire of low degree. I pray you, fall to. If you can mock a leek, you can eat a leek.","That’s very true, mangy rascal, when it pleases God. Meanwhile, I’d be gratified if you’d live and eat your food. Come, here’s some sauce to go with it. (strikes him with his club) Yesterday you called me “mountain squire.” Today I’ll make you squire of the low ground. Go on, eat up. If you can mock a leek, you can eat a leek."
"Enough, Captain. You have astonished him.","Enough, Captain. You’ve stunned him."
"I say I will make him eat some part of my leek, or I will peat his pate four days.—Bite, I pray you. It is good for your green wound and your ploody coxcomb.","I tell you, I’ll either make him eat some part of this leek or give him a four-day head-bashing.—Go on, bite. It’s good for your fresh wound and your bloody noggin."
Must I bite?,Must I bite?
"Yes, certainly, and out of doubt and out of question, too, and ambiguities.","Yes, absolutely, no question or ambiguity about it."
"By this leek, I will most horribly revenge. I eat and eat, I swear—","By this leek, I swear I’ll make you pay for this. (FLUELLEN threatens to strike him) Okay, okay, I’m eating it—"
"Eat, I pray you. Will you have some more sauce to your leek? There is not enough leek to swear by.",Please do. Would you like some more sauce to go with it? There isn’t enough leek left for you to swear on.
Quiet thy cudgel. Thou dost see I eat.,"Lay off, already! Can’t you see I’m eating?"
"Much good do you, scald knave, heartily. Nay, pray you throw none away. The skin is good for your broken coxcomb. When you take occasions to see leeks hereafter, I pray you, mock at 'em, that is all.","I sincerely hope it does you good, mangy rascal. No, don’t throw any of it away. The skin is good for your cracked head. When you see leeks in the future, I hope you keep mocking them. That’s all."
Good.,Good.
"Ay, leeks is good. Hold you, there is a groat to heal your pate.","Yes, leeks are good. Wait, here’s a penny to heal your head."
"Me, a groat?","Me, a penny?"
"Yes, verily, and in truth you shall take it, or I have another leek in my pocket, which you shall eat.","Yes, and you’ll take it. If not, I have another leek in my pocket that you can eat."
I take thy groat in earnest of revenge.,I’ll take this penny as a token that you’ll pay for this.
"If I owe you anything, I will pay you in cudgels. You shall be a woodmonger and buy nothing of me but cudgels. God be wi' you and keep you and heal your pate.","If I owe you anything, I’ll pay you in clubbings. You’ll become a wood salesman and buy nothing but clubs from me. God be with you and keep you, and may he heal your head."
All hell shall stir for this.,There’ll be hell to pay for this.
"Go, go. You are a counterfeit cowardly knave. Will you mock at an ancient tradition begun upon an honorable respect and worn as a memorable trophy of predeceased valor, and dare not avouch in your deeds any of your words? I have seen you gleeking and galling at this gentleman twice or thrice. You thought because he could not speak English in the native garb, he could not therefore handle an English cudgel. You find it otherwise, and henceforth let a Welsh correction teach you a good English condition. Fare you well.","Go on, get out of here. You’re a lying, cowardly wretch. You mock an ancient tradition, born of reverence and worn in honor of brave men who have died, and then have the gall not to stand by your words. I’ve seen you bait and mock this man more than once. You thought because he didn’t speak English like a native he couldn’t handle an English club. You’ve learned otherwise. Let this be a Welsh lesson to you to behave with English manners in the future. Farewell."
"Doth Fortune play the huswife with me now? News have I that my Nell is dead i' th' spital Of a malady of France, Old I do wax, and from my weary limbs Honor is cudgeled. Well, bawd I’ll turn, And something lean to cutpurse of quick hand. To England will I steal, and there I’ll steal. And swear I got them in the Gallia wars.","Has Fortune turned on me, like the whore she is? I’ve had news that my Nell died of the pox in a hospice. There went my last refuge. I grow old, and all dignity has been thrashed out of me. Well, I’ll turn pimp and do some occasional pickpocketing. I’ll steal away to England, and I’ll steal some more when I get there. I’ll bandage up these wounds and swear I got them in the French wars."
"Unto our brother France and to our sister, Health and fair time of day.—Joy and good wishes To our most fair and princely cousin Katherine.— And, as a branch and member of this royalty, We do salute you, Duke of Burgundy.— And princes French, and peers, health to you all. Peace to this meeting wherefore we are met.","Peace to this occasion that’s brought us all together. Health and good day to our brother the king of France and to our sister the queen. Joy and good wishes to our lovely royal cousin, Katherine. And you, Duke of Burgundy, who brought this great assembly together, we salute you as descendent and member of this royal family. And a health to all you lords and princes of France."
"Most worthy brother England. Fairly met. —So are you, princes English, every one.","We rejoice to see you, most worthy brother of England. You are welcome here, as are all of you English princes."
"So happy be the issue, brother England, Of this good day and of this gracious meeting, Your eyes which hitherto have borne in them Against the French that met them in their bent The fatal balls of murdering basilisks. The venom of such looks, we fairly hope, Shall change all griefs and quarrels into love.","Brother of England, may this meeting prove as fruitful as it is joyous. We are glad to look upon your face—a face whose eyes have until now carried in them a glance as deadly, for any Frenchman they alighted on, as the poisonous eyes of those mythical lizards, the basilisks. We hope your poison has worn off and this day shall transform all grievances and quarrels into friendship."
"To cry “Amen” to that, thus we appear.",We’re here to say “amen” to that.
"You English princes all, I do salute you.","All you English princes, I salute you."
"My duty to you both, on equal love, With all my wits, my pains, and strong endeavors, To bring your most imperial Majesties Unto this bar and royal interview, Your mightiness on both parts best can witness. That face to face and royal eye to eye You have congreeted. Let it not disgrace me If I demand before this royal view What rub or what impediment there is Dear nurse of arts, plenties, and joyful births, Should not in this best garden of the world, Our fertile France, put up her lovely visage? Alas, she hath from France too long been chased, Corrupting in its own fertility. Her vine, the merry cheerer of the heart, Unprunèd, dies. Her hedges, even-pleached, Like prisoners wildly overgrown with hair, The darnel, hemlock, and rank fumitory Doth root upon, while that the coulter rusts That should deracinate such savagery. The even mead, that erst brought sweetly forth Wanting the scythe, withal uncorrected, rank, Conceives by idleness, and nothing teems But hateful docks, rough thistles, kecksies, burrs, Losing both beauty and utility. Defective in their natures, grow to wildness, Even so our houses and ourselves and children Have lost, or do not learn for want of time, The sciences that should become our country,","Great kings of France and England, I owe you both equal service and loyalty. Your Highnesses can both attest to the fact that I’ve strived mightily, with all my wits and energy, to bring about this royal meeting between you two imperial Majesties. Since I have succeeded to the point of bringing you face to face and eye to eye, don’t take it ill if I formally demand to know, before this royal congregation, what obstacle or impediment prevents the poor fragile, mangled peace, the mother of arts and joyous births, from showing her lovely face in this most fertile garden of the world, our fair France? Alas, she has been too long exiled from France, whose crops all lie in heaps, rotting with ripeness. Her grapes, which make the wine that cheers our hearts, die unpruned on the vines. Her once-trimmed hedges, like prisoners with wild, untended hair, put forth unruly twigs. Her fallow fields are overgrown with weeds, while the blade that should uproot such wilderness lies rusting. The level meadow, where the freckled cowslip, burnet, and green clover once grew, has become useless: unmowed, it grows to seed, so that nothing springs up but weeds, rough thistles, barren plants, and burs. And just as our vineyards, fallow fields, meadows, and hedges, which grow improperly if left to themselves, run riot, so our families and ourselves and our"
"That nothing do but meditate on blood, To swearing and stern looks, diffused attire, And everything that seems unnatural. Which to reduce into our former favor That I may know the let why gentle peace Should not expel these inconveniences And bless us with her former qualities.","children have lost—or no longer have time to learn—skills that should be a credit to our country. They grow like savages—like soldiers who meditate on nothing but blood—surrounded by swearing and stern looks, ragged clothing and everything unnatural. It’s to reverse all this, so we can once again become as we were, that you have all been brought together; therefore I demand to know why gentle peace should not banish these troubles and bless us with her former qualities."
"If, Duke of Burgundy, you would the peace, Which you have cited, you must buy that peace With full accord to all our just demands, Whose tenors and particular effects You have, enscheduled briefly, in your hands.","Duke of Burgundy, if you want peace, the lack of which creates these misfortunes you describe, you must purchase it buy agreeing across-the-board to all our very just demands. You hold the details and particulars of our terms, briefly enumerated, before you in your hands."
There is no answer made.,"The king has heard them, but as yet has made no answer."
"Well then, the peace which you before so urged Lies in his answer.","Well, the peace you pleaded for so eloquently just now lies in his answer."
"I have but with a cursitory eye To appoint some of your council presently To sit with us once more with better heed To resurvey them, we will suddenly Pass our accept and peremptory answer.","I’ve only given the articles a cursory glance. If your Grace would kindly appoint some members of your council to sit with me once more and go over them more carefully, I will give my answer and acceptance right away."
"And brother Clarence, and you, brother Gloucester, Warwick and Huntingdon, go with the king And take with you free power to ratify, Augment, or alter, as your wisdoms best Anything in or out of our demands,","Brother, I shall. Go, uncle Exeter, and brother Clarence, and you, brother Gloucester, Warwick and Huntingdon, go with the king. You have full power to confirm, change, or add to any of my demands in any"
"And we’ll consign thereto.—Will you, fair sister, Go with the princes or stay here with us?","way that you judge advantageous to my rule, and I’ll undertake to agree to it. Fair sister, will you go with the princes or stay here with me?"
"Our gracious brother, I will go with them. When articles too nicely urged be stood on.","Gracious brother, I will go with them. Perhaps a woman’s voice may do some good when some small detail proves to be holding things up."
"Yet leave our cousin Katherine here with us. She is our capital demand, comprised Within the forerank of our articles.","In that case, leave our cousin Katherine here with us. She is our principal demand—one of the first points of the treaty."
She hath good leave.,She is welcome to stay.
"Fair Katherine, and most fair, Will you vouchsafe to teach a soldier terms Such as will enter at a lady’s ear And plead his love suit to her gentle heart?","Lovely, most lovely Katherine, will you agree to teach a soldier the words that would recommend his love-suit to a gentle heart like yours?"
England.,Your Majesty shall mock at me. I cannot speak your England.
"O fair Katherine, if you will love me soundly with your French heart, I will be glad to hear you confess it brokenly with your English tongue. Do you like me, Kate?","Lovely Katherine, if you will love me well with your French heart, I’m happy to hear you confess it in broken English. Do you like me, Kate?"
"Pardonnez-moi, I cannot tell what is “like me.”",Pardon me but I do not know what is “like me.”
"An angel is like you, Kate, and you are like an angel.","An angel is like you, Kate, and you are like an angel."
(to ALICE) Que dit-il? Que je suis semblable à les anges?,"(to ALICE, in French) What does he say? That I am like an angel?"
"Oui, vraiment, sauf votre Grâce, ainsi dit-il.","(in French) Yes, your Grace, that’s what he says."
"I said so, dear Katherine; and I must not blush to affirm it.","I said so, dear Katherine, and I’m not ashamed to repeat it."
Ô bon Dieu! Les langues des hommes sont pleines de 									tromperies.,"(in French) Oh, Lord! The tongues of men are full of deceit."
"What says she, fair one? That the tongues of men are full of deceits?","(to ALICE) What does she say, pretty one? That the tongues of men are full of deceits?"
"Oui, dat de tongues of de mans is be full of deceits; dat is de princess.","Oui, dat de tongues of de mans is be full of deceits: dere’s de princess for you."
"The princess is the better Englishwoman.—I' faith, Kate, my wooing is fit for thy understanding. I am glad thou canst speak no better English, for if thou couldst, thou wouldst find me such a plain king that thou wouldst think I had sold my farm to buy my crown. I know no ways to mince it in love, but directly to say, “I love you.” Then if you urge me farther than to say, “Do you, in faith?” I wear out my suit. Give me your answer, i' faith, do; and so clap hands and a bargain. How say you, lady?","How very English of her. Kate, my wooing is fit for your understanding: I am glad your English isn’t better. If it were, you would find me such an ordinary king that you would think I’d sold my farm to buy my crown. I don’t know any fancy ways of talking about love, only to say right out, “I love you.” If you press me any further than with the question, “Do you really?” my love scene is over. So give me your answer, and we’ll shake on it. Deal?"
"Sauf votre honneur, me understand vell.","With all due respect, me understand well."
"Marry, if you would put me to verses or to dance for your sake, Kate, why you undid me. For the one, I have neither words nor measure; and for the other, I have no strength in measure, yet a reasonable measure in strength. If I could win a lady at leapfrog or by vaulting into my saddle with my armor on my back, under the correction of bragging be it spoken, I should quickly leap into a wife. Or if I might buffet for my love or bound my horse for her favors, I could lay on like a butcher and sit like a jackanapes, never off. But, before God, Kate, I cannot look greenly nor gasp out my eloquence, nor I have no cunning in protestation, only","Really, if you were thinking of having me write poetry or dance for you, Kate, you’ve defeated me already. I have no gift for the one and no strength for the other, though I have the gift of strength. If I could win a lady by playing leapfrog or vaulting into my saddle with my armor on my back—though you may accuse me of boasting—I could easily get myself a wife. I can fight with my fists and rear my horse up without falling off him, if either of those things could win me love. But,"
"downright oaths, which I never use till urged, nor never break for urging. If thou canst love a fellow of this temper, Kate, whose face is not worth sunburning, that never looks in his glass for love of anything he sees there, let thine eye be thy cook. I speak to thee plain soldier. If thou canst love me for this, take me. If not, to say to thee that I shall die is true, but for thy love, by the Lord, no. Yet I love thee too. And while thou liv’st, dear Kate, take a fellow of plain and uncoined constancy, for he perforce must do thee right because he hath not the gift to woo in other places. For these fellows of infinite tongue, that can rhyme themselves into ladies' favors, they do always reason themselves out again. What? A speaker is but a prater, a rhyme is but a ballad, a good leg will fall, a straight back will stoop, a black beard will turn white, a curled pate will grow bald, a fair face will wither, a full eye will wax hollow, but a good heart, Kate, is the sun and the moon, or rather the sun and not the moon, for it shines bright and never changes but keeps his course truly. If thou would have such a one, take me. And take me, take a soldier. Take a soldier, take a king. And what say’st thou then to my love? Speak, my fair, and fairly, I pray thee.","before God, Kate, I cannot turn pale on purpose or gasp out fancy phrases, and I have no gift for clever declarations, only blunt oaths, which I never use till I’m asked and never break no matter who asks me. If you can love a man of this temperament, Kate, whose face a sunburn wouldn’t make any worse and who never looks in the mirror to admire himself, let your eye improve me. I speak to you as a plain soldier. If you can love me for this, take me. If not, to tell you I will die is true, but not for love, by God. And yet I do love you. So take for life a fellow of pure and plain faithfulness. He’s bound to be true to you as he won’t be up to flirting with other women. These chatty fellows who can rhyme their way into a lady’s good graces always reason themselves out again. Look, a talker is just a gabber; a poem is just a rhyme. A good leg will shrink, a straight back stoop, a black beard turn white, a curly head grow bald, an attractive face grow wrinkled and a pretty eye hollow. But a good heart, Kate, is the sun and the moon, or, rather, the sun, and not the moon, for it goes on shining brightly forever. If you would have such a man, take me. Take me and get a soldier; take a soldier and get a king. So what do you say to my suit? Speak, my fair one, and speak fairly, I beg you."
Is it possible dat I sould love de enemy of France?,Is it possible dat I sould love de enemy of France?
"No, it is not possible you should love the enemy of France, Kate. But, in loving me, you should love the friend of France, for I love France so well that I will not part with a village of it. I will have it all mine. And, Kate, when France is mine and I am yours, then yours is France and you are mine.","No, it is not possible you should love the enemy of France, Kate. But in loving me, you would love the friend of France, for I love France so much that I will not part with a single village of it. I will have it all mine. And, Kate, when France is mine and I am yours, then France is yours and you are mine."
I cannot tell wat is dat.,I don’t understand all dat.
"No, Kate? I will tell thee in French, which I am sure will hang upon my tongue like a new-married wife about her husband’s neck, hardly to be shook off. Je quand sur le possession de France, et quand vous avez le possession de moi—let me see, what then? Saint Denis be my speed!— donc vôtre est France et vous êtes mienne. It is as easy for me, Kate, to conquer the kingdom as to speak so much more French. I shall never move thee in French, unless it be to laugh at me.","No, Kate? I will tell you in French, which I am sure will hang as heavily on my tongue as a newly married wife around her husband’s neck, impossible to shake off. (in stilted French) I, when, on the possession of France, and when you have the possession of me—(in English) let me see, what then? help me, Saint Denis!—(French again) then yours is France and you are mine. (in English) It would be as easy for me to reconquer the kingdom, Kate, as it would be for me to speak that much French again. I’ll never move you in French, except to laugh at me."
"Sauf votre honneur, le français que vous parlez, il est meilleur 									que l'anglais lequel je parle.","Your French, sir, is better than my English."
"No, faith, is ’t not, Kate, but thy speaking of my tongue, and I thine, most truly-falsely must needs be granted to be much at one. But, Kate, dost thou understand thus much English? Canst thou love me?","No, really, it’s not, Kate. But your speaking my language, and I yours truly-falsely Sincerely but incorrectly. truly-falsely comes to pretty much the same thing. Can you understand this much English though, Kate? Could you love me?"
I cannot tell.,I cannot tell.
"Can any of your neighbors tell, Kate? I’ll ask them. Come, I know thou lovest me; and at night, when you come into your closet, you’ll question this gentlewoman about me, and, I know, Kate, you will to her dispraise those parts in me that you love with your heart. But, good Kate, mock me mercifully, the rather, gentle princess, because I love thee cruelly. If ever thou beest mine, Kate, as I have a saving faith within me tells me thou shalt, I get thee with scambling, and thou must therefore needs prove a good soldier-breeder. Shall not thou and I, between Saint Denis","Can any of your neighbors tell, Kate? I’ll ask them. Come, I know you love me. And at night, when you go to your bedroom, you’ll question this gentlewoman about me and, I know, Kate, you’ll criticize those qualities of mine that you secretly love. But mock me gently, dear Kate, because I love you terribly. If I ever win you, Kate, as I have an inkling I will, it won’t be without a skirmish—and that suggests you’d make a good mother of soldiers. Shall not you and I together, then, between Saint Denis and Saint George, make a boy, half French, half English, who will go to Constantinople"
"and Saint George, compound a boy, half French, half English, that shall go to Constantinople and take the Turk by the beard? Shall we not? What say’st thou, my fair flower de luce?","and grab the Turk by the beard? Shall we not? What do you say, my fair fleur-de-lys?"
I do not know dat.,I do not know dat.
"No, ’tis hereafter to know, but now to promise. Do but now promise, Kate, you will endeavor for your French part of such a boy; and for my English moiety take the word of a king and a bachelor. How answer you, la plus belle 								Katherine du monde, mon très cher et divin déesse?","No, of course you don’t. It lies in the future, along with certainty. Now there can only be the promise. Do promise, Kate, that you’ll do your French part to bring forth such a boy; and for my English half, take the word of a king and a bachelor. What’s your answer, (speaking in French) oh loveliest of Katherines, my most precious and divine goddess?"
Your Majestée ave fausse French enough to deceive de most sage demoiselle dat is en France.,Your Majesty has false French enough to deceive de wisest lady in France.
"Now fie upon my false French. By mine honor, in true English, I love thee, Kate. By which honor I dare not swear thou lovest me, yet my blood begins to flatter me that thou dost, notwithstanding the poor and untempering effect of my visage. Now, beshrew my father’s ambition! He was thinking of civil wars when he got me; therefore was I created with a stubborn outside, with an aspect of iron, that when I come to woo ladies, I fright them. But, in faith, Kate, the elder I wax, the better I shall appear. My comfort is that old age, that ill layer-up of beauty, can do no more spoil upon my face. Thou hast me, if thou hast me, at the worst, and thou shalt wear me, if thou wear me, better and better. And therefore tell me, most fair Katherine, will you have me? Put off your maiden blushes, avouch the thoughts of your heart with the looks of an empress, take me by the hand, and say “Harry of England, I am thine,” which word thou shalt no sooner bless mine ear withal, but I will tell","Damn my false French. I tell you truly, in true English: I love you, Kate. And though I wouldn’t dare to swear that you love me, still my blood begins to flatter me that you do, despite the ill effects of my face. Curse my father’s ambition! He was thinking of civil wars when he conceived me, and consequently my outward appearance is harsh and steely. I intimidate ladies when I come to woo them. But I promise you, Kate: the older I grow the better I’ll look. My comfort is that old age, that poor preserver of beauty, can’t make my face any worse than it already is. If you have me, you have me now at my worst; and if you have me, you’ll appreciate me better and better. Therefore tell me, fairest Katherine, will you have me? Put aside your maiden blushes and speak your true feelings with the bearing of an empress. Take me by the hand and say, “Harry of England, I am yours.” No sooner shall I hear that word than I will tell you straight out, “England is yours, Ireland is yours, France is yours, and Harry Plantagenet"
"thee aloud “England is thine, Ireland is thine, France is thine, and Harry Plantagenet is thine,” who, though I speak it before his face, if he be not fellow with the best king, thou shalt find the best king of good fellows. Come, your answer in broken music, for thy voice is music and thy English broken. Therefore, queen of all, Katherine, break thy mind to me in broken English. Wilt thou have me?","is yours.” And, though I say so in his presence, if he’s not a friend of the best kings, you’ll find him king of the best friends. Come on, tell me in broken music—for your voice is music and your English broken. Come, Katherine Queen of All, reveal your heart to me in broken English. Will you have me?"
Dat is as it sall please de roi mon père.,Dat is as it shall please de king my father.
"Nay, it will please him well, Kate; it shall please him, Kate.","Oh, it will please him, Kate. It will please him very well."
Den it sall also content me.,Den it shall also content me.
"Upon that I kiss your hand, and I call you my queen.",With that I kiss your hand and call you my queen.
"Laissez, mon seigneur, laissez, laissez! Ma foi, je ne veux 									point que vous abaissiez votre grandeur en baisant la main 									d'une—Notre Seigneur!—indigne serviteur. Excusez-moi, je 									vous supplie, mon très puissant eigneur.","(in French) No, sir! Stop, stop! Heavens, I can’t allow you to lower yourself by kissing the hand of one of your humble servants. I hope you’ll pardon me, mighty king."
"Then I will kiss your lips, Kate.","Then I will kiss your lips, Kate."
"Les dames et demoiselles pour être baisées devant leur noces, 									il n'est pas la coutume de France.",(in French) It is not the custom for French maidens to kiss before they are married.
"Madam my interpreter, what says she?","What does she say, madam interpreter?"
Dat it is not be de fashion pour les ladies of France—I cannot tell wat is baiser en Anglish.,Dat it not be de custom pour les ladies of France—I cannot tell vat is baiser en Anglish.
To kiss.,To kiss.
Your Majesté entendre bettre que moi.,Your Majesty understand bettre den me.
"It is not a fashion for the maids in France to kiss before they are married, would she say?","It is not the custom for the maids in France to kiss before they are married, is that what she says?"
"Oui, vraiment.","Yes, exactly."
"O Kate, nice customs curtsy to great kings. Dear Kate, you and I cannot be confined within the weak list of a country’s fashion. We are the makers of manners, Kate, and the liberty that follows our places stops the mouth of all find- faults, as I will do yours for upholding the nice fashion of your country in denying me a kiss. Therefore, patiently and yielding. (kissing her) You have witchcraft in your lips, Kate. There is more eloquence in a sugar touch of them than in the tongues of the French council, and they should sooner persuade Harry of England than a general petition of monarchs. Here comes your father.","Oh, Kate, prudish customs bow before great kings. You and I cannot be held within the confines of a country’s arbitrary customs, dear Kate. You and I, Kate, we are the makers of custom, and the freedom that goes with our position silences all who would criticize, as I will silence you for upholding the prudish custom of your country in refusing me a kiss. Therefore, willingly and yielding. (kisses her) You have witchcraft in your lips, Kate. There is more eloquence in a sweet touch of them than in the tongues of the whole French council. They would persuade Harry of England sooner than a whole assembly of monarchs. Here comes your father."
"God save your Majesty. My royal cousin, teach you our princess English?","God save your Majesty. My royal kinsman, are you teaching our princess English?"
"I would have her learn, my fair cousin, how perfectly I love her, and that is good English.","I wanted to teach her how perfectly I love her, kinsman, and that’s good English."
Is she not apt?,"She picks it up quick, doesn’t she?"
"Our tongue is rough, coz, and my condition is not smooth, so that, having neither the voice nor the heart of flattery about me, I cannot so conjure up the spirit of love in her that he will appear in his true likeness.","Our language is rough, friend, and it’s not in my nature to speak smoothly. So, possessing neither a voice nor a heart for flattery, I can’t awaken the spirit of love in her so as to make him appear in his true likeness."
"Pardon the frankness of my mirth if I answer you for that. If you would conjure in her, you must make a circle; if conjure up Love in her in his true likeness, he must appear naked and blind. Can you blame her then, being a maid yet rosed over with the virgin crimson of modesty, if she deny the appearance of a naked blind boy in her naked seeing self? It were, my lord, a hard condition for a maid to consign to.","Forgive my boldness if I take you up on your words about making magic. For love to appear in his true likeness, he would have to be as Cupid is: naked and blind. How can you blame her, a tender young maiden still given to virgin blushes, for objecting to having a blind, naked boy appear before her? It’s a lot to ask of a maiden."
"Yet they do wink and yield, as love is blind and enforces.","But virgins close their eyes and submit all the time, and blind love has his way."
"They are then excused, my lord, when they see not what they do.","They’re forgiven, then, if they don’t see what they’re doing."
"Then, good my lord, teach your cousin to consent winking.","Then teach your cousin to also be willing to close her eyes, my lord."
"I will wink on her to consent, my lord, if you will teach her to know my meaning, for maids, well summered and warm kept, are like flies at Bartholomew-tide: blind, though they have their eyes; and then they will endure handling, which before would not abide looking on.","I will signal her with a wink to consent, my lord, if you will teach her what that means. Maidens who are well fed and well taken care of are like August flies, blind though they can see. They’ll let you handle them then, though they’d scarcely let you look at them before."
"This moral ties me over to time and a hot summer. And so I shall catch the fly, your cousin, in the latter end and she must be blind too.","So you’re telling me to give it time and wait for summer. And even then, in order for me to catch the fly your cousin, she must be blind?"
"As love is, my lord, before it loves.","Like love, my lord, before it learns to love."
"It is so. And you may, some of you, thank love for my blindness, who cannot see many a fair French city for one fair French maid that stands in my way.","Fair enough. Some of you may, thank love for my blindness. There’s many a French town that I can’t see because one pretty French maid stands in front of me."
"Yes, my lord, you see them perspectively, the cities turned into a maid, for they are all girdled with maiden walls that war hath never entered.","Oh yes, my lord, you see them, but you see them metaphorically. The cities appear to you like a maiden because virgin walls, which war has never invaded, surround them."
Shall Kate be my wife?,Shall Kate be my wife?
So please you.,If you wish.
"I am content, so the maiden cities you talk of may wait on her. So the maid that stood in the way for my wish shall show me the way to my will.","I am satisfied, as long as the maiden cities you talk of come with her. That way, the maiden that stood between me and them shall be the means of my achieving my desire."
We have consented to all terms of reason.,We have consented to all reasonable terms.
"Is ’t so, my lords of England?","Is that true, my lords of England?"
"His daughter first, and, in sequel, all, According to their firm proposed natures.","The king has agreed to every point: first his daughter, then everything else, as you strictly proposed."
"Only he hath not yet subscribèd this: Where your Majesty demands that the king of France, 								having any occasion to write for matter of grant, shall name 								your Highness in this form and with this addition, in 								French: Notre très cher fils Henri, roi d'Angleterre, héritier 								de France; and thus in Latin: Praeclarissimus filius noster 									Henricus, rex Angliae, et haeres Franciae.","Except that he has not yet agreed to address you in this form and with this title—in French, Notre tres cher fils Henri, Roi d'Angleterre, Heritier de France; and in Latin, Praeclarissimus filius noster Henricus “Our thrice-glorious son, Henry, King of England and Heir of France” Henricus , Rex Angliae, et Haeres Franciae."
But your request shall make me let it pass.,And even this I’m willing to grant if you request it.
"I pray you, then, in love and dear alliance, Let that one article rank with the rest, And thereupon give me your daughter.","In that case, I ask that for the sake of friendship and alliance you let that one item stand with the rest, and bestow your daughter on me."
"Issue to me, that the contending kingdoms Of France and England, whose very shores look pale With envy of each other’s happiness,","Take her, my son, and give me children by her, so that the warring kingdoms of France and England, whose very shores have paled in envy at each other’s happiness, may finally end their mutual hostility. May this"
"May cease their hatred, and this dear conjunction In their sweet bosoms, that never war advance His bleeding sword ’twixt England and fair France.",precious marriage cause friendship and alliance between them and war never again threaten England or fair France with his bloody sword.
Amen.,Amen.
"Now welcome, Kate, and bear me witness all","Now, welcome, Kate.—And let everyone bear witness that here I kiss her as my sovereign queen."
"God, the best maker of all marriages, Combine your hearts in one, your realms in one. As man and wife, being two, are one in love, So be there ’twixt your kingdoms such a spousal Which troubles oft the bed of blessèd marriage, Thrust in between the paction of these kingdoms To make divorce of their incorporate league, That English may as French, French Englishmen,","May God, who is the best matchmaker, join your hearts and realms in one. As man and wife, though two, are one in love, so let there be between your kingdoms such a marriage that neither wrongdoing nor fierce jealousy, which often trouble the sacred state of marriage, ever sever them. And let Englishmen be French and Frenchmen English. God say, “Amen”!"
Amen.,Amen!
"Prepare we for our marriage; on which day, My Lord of Burgundy, we’ll take your oath, And all the peers', for surety of our leagues. And may our oaths well kept and prosp'rous be.","Let us prepare for our wedding.—On that day, I’ll take your oath of loyalty, my Lord of Burgundy and all my peers, to guarantee my treaty. Then I will swear to Kate and you to me, and may our oaths be faithfully kept and prove fortunate."
"Thus far with rough and all-unable pen Our bending author hath pursued the story, In little room confining mighty men, Small time, but in that small most greatly lived This star of England. Fortune made his sword, By which the world’s best garden be achieved And of it left his son imperial lord. Of France and England, did this king succeed, Whose state so many had the managing That they lost France and made his England bleed, Which oft our stage hath shown. And for their sake,","Thus far has our straining author pursued the story with his crude, inadequate writing, keeping important people penned up in this little room while he mangled history’s full glory with his uneven telling. The lifespan of our English hero was brief, but in that brief time he achieved greatness. He had good luck as a warrior, and with it he created the world’s greatest garden, France, leaving his son as its imperial ruler. Henry the Sixth, crowned king of France and England while still in his infancy, succeeded him. But so many people had a hand in managing the child’s kingdom that France was lost and civil war came to England—a story we’ve acted out many times on this stage. With those plays in mind, we hope you’ll receive this one kindly."
