"Open your ears, for which of you will stop The vent of hearing when loud Rumor speaks? I, from the orient to the drooping west, Making the wind my post-horse, still unfold Upon my tongues continual slanders ride, The which in every language I pronounce, Stuffing the ears of men with false reports. I speak of peace while covert enmity And who but Rumor, who but only I, Make fearful musters and prepared defense, Whiles the big year, swoll'n with some other grief, Is thought with child by the stern tyrant war, Blown by surmises, jealousies, conjectures, And of so easy and so plain a stop That the blunt monster with uncounted heads, The still-discordant wav'ring multitude, My well-known body to anatomize Among my household? Why is Rumor here? I run before King Harry’s victory, Who in a bloody field by Shrewsbury Quenching the flame of bold rebellion Even with the rebels' blood. But what mean I To speak so true at first? My office is To noise abroad that Harry Monmouth fell","Open your ears! For who could possibly block them when loud Rumor speaks? I make the wind my horse, and ride it from the Orient in the east to the place where the sun sets in the west, describing the events taking place in the world. I continually tell lies and I tell them in every language, stuffing men’s ears with falsehoods. I say that things are peaceful when, in reality, concealed hatred is at work, hidden behind smiles of good will. And who but Rumor—who besides me—can make armies prepare anxious defenses, when in fact the world is uneasy for other reasons and there’s no war coming at all? Rumor is like a flute. Guesswork, suspicion, and speculation are the breath that makes it sound, and it’s so easy to play that even the common masses—that dim monster with innumerable heads, forever clamoring and wavering—can play it. But why should I describe myself in such detail to the one group of people who knows exactly what falsehood is all about: a theater audience? Why am I here? King Henry has won the war, and at Shrewsbury, he ended the rebellion against him by defeating Hotspur and his allies, quenching the fire of revolt with the rebels' own blood. But what am I doing, telling you the truth up front? My job is to spread word that Hotspur in his fury killed Prince Hal, and that Douglas killed the King. I’ve spread this rumor through all the peasant"
"And that the King before the Douglas' rage Stooped his anointed head as low as death. This have I rumored through the peasant towns Between that royal field of Shrewsbury Where Hotspur’s father, old Northumberland, Lies crafty-sick. The posts come tiring on, And not a man of them brings other news Than they have learnt of me. From Rumor’s tongues","villages from Shrewsbury to the place where I now stand: in front of the worm-eaten, dilapidated castle of Northumberland, Hotspur’s father, who lies within and pretends to be sick. The messengers are coming hot and heavy, and every single one of them will report nothing but what he’s heard from me. Straight from Rumor, they bring pretty tales of false comfort, which are far worse than truthful news of misfortune."
"Who keeps the gate here, ho?",Hello? Who’s the doorman around here?
Where is the Earl?,(to the PORTER) Where’s the Earl?
What shall I say you are?,Who shall I say you are?
Tell thou the Earl That the Lord Bardolph doth attend him here.,Tell the Earl that the Lord Bardolph is here to see him.
His lordship is walked forth into the orchard. And he himself will answer.,"His lordship is out walking in the orchard. If you don’t mind, knock at the orchard gate and he’ll answer it himself."
Here comes the Earl.,Here comes the Earl.
"What news, Lord Bardolph? Every minute now Should be the father of some stratagem. The times are wild. Contention, like a horse And bears down all before him.","What’s the news, Lord Bardolph? Every minute, new violence erupts; it is a wild time. Conflict is like a horse, fed with too much rich food: it has broken out uncontrollably, and tramples everyone who stands before it."
"Noble Earl, I bring you certain news from Shrewsbury.","Noble Earl, I have reliable news from Shrewsbury."
"Good, an God will!","Good news, God willing."
"As good as heart can wish. And, in the fortune of my lord your son, Prince Harry slain outright; and both the Blunts Killed by the hand of Douglas; young Prince John And Westmoreland and Stafford fled the field; Is prisoner to your son. O, such a day, So fought, so followed, and so fairly won, Came not till now to dignify the times Since Caesar’s fortunes.","As good as one could wish for. The King has been wounded and is near death. And, thanks to your son’s luck, Prince Harry has been killed. Douglas killed both Lords Blunt. Prince John of Lancaster, Westmoreland, and Stafford fled the battlefield. And your son captured that hulking Sir John Falstaff, Prince Harry’s fattened pig. Oh, there hasn’t been a battle so well fought or a victory so well won since the days of Julius Caesar! It brings honor to our times."
How is this derived?,How do you know all this? Did you see the battlefield? Did you come from Shrewsbury?
"I spake with one, my lord, that came from thence, A gentleman well bred and of good name, That freely rendered me these news for true.","I talked with someone, my lord, who was coming from there. He was a gentleman, with good breeding and a good reputation. He swore that all this was the truth."
"Here comes my servant Travers, who I sent","Here comes my servant, Travers. I sent him last Tuesday to find out what was happening."
"My lord, I overrode him on the way; And he is furnished with no certainties More than he haply may retail from me.","Sir, I passed him on my way here. He doesn’t know anything more than what I told him."
"Now, Travers, what good tidings comes with you?","Now Travers, what good news do you have?"
"With joyful tidings and, being better horsed, Outrode me. After him came spurring hard A gentleman, almost forspent with speed, That stopp’d by me to breathe his bloodied horse. I did demand what news from Shrewsbury. He told me that rebellion had bad luck And that young Harry Percy’s spur was cold. With that he gave his able horse the head Against the panting sides of his poor jade Up to the rowel-head, and starting so He seemed in running to devour the way, Staying no longer question.","Sir, Lord Many critics believe that the “Sir John Umfrevile” in Shakespeare’s text is a textual error, an accidental leftover from an early draft, and that Travers is actually referring to Bardolph. Lord Bardolph told me happy news and I turned around, to come back here. But he had a faster horse, so he passed me and got here first. Another man came after him, riding hard. He was nearly exhausted from going so fast, and he stopped to give his bleeding horse a break. He asked me for directions to Chester, and I demanded to hear news from Shrewsbury. He said that the rebels had been beaten, and that Harry Percy’s spur was cold. Then he took off on his horse, leaned forward in his saddle, and jammed his heels into the animal’s side so hard that they almost disappeared. He rode so fast he seemed to be devouring the highway. He didn’t stay around to answer any of my questions."
"Ha? Again: Of Hotspur, Coldspur? That rebellion Had met ill luck?",What? Say that again: he said that Harry Percy’s spur was cold? Hotspur is now “Coldspur?” That the rebels had bad luck?
"My lord, I’ll tell you what: If my young lord your son have not the day, Upon mine honor, for a silken point","My lord, I’ll tell you what—if your son hasn’t won, on my honor, I’ll exchange all my land for a lace to tie stockings with; don’t even say such a thing."
Why should that gentleman that rode by Travers Give then such instances of loss?,But why would that gentleman who rode past Travers describe such examples of loss?
"Who, he? He was some hilding fellow that had stolen The horse he rode on and, upon my life,","Who, him? He was some insignificant nobody who stole the horse he was riding and, I bet my life, was just talking nonsense. Look, here comes another messenger."
"Yea, this man’s brow, like to a title leaf, Foretells the nature of a tragic volume. So looks the strand whereon the imperious flood Hath left a witness’d usurpation.—","Yes. And the look on his face is like the title page of a book: it hints at the tragic story within. His brow is lined with furrows, like a beach after a wild flood. Morton, did you come from Shrewsbury?"
"I ran from Shrewsbury, my noble lord, Where hateful death put on his ugliest mask To fright our party.","I ran from Shrewsbury, my noble lord. Death was there, frightening our side with his ugliest mask."
"How doth my son and brother? Is apter than thy tongue to tell thy errand. Even such a man, so faint, so spiritless, So dull, so dead in look, so woebegone, Drew Priam’s curtain in the dead of night, But Priam found the fire ere he his tongue, And I my Percy’s death ere thou report’st it. This thou wouldst say, “Your son did thus and thus; Your brother thus; so fought the noble Douglas”— But in the end, to stop my ear indeed, Thou hast a sigh to blow away this praise, Ending with “Brother, son, and all are dead.”","How are my son and my brother? You’re trembling, and the paleness of your face is more likely to convey your news than your tongue. This is like that old story about the burning of Troy. A man like you—faint, lifeless, dull, deadly-looking, sad—woke King Priam in the dead of night to tell him that half the city of Troy had been burned down. But Priam saw the fire before this man could speak, and I can see my Percy’s death before you report it. You’re going to tell me, “Your son did such-and-such; your brother did this; the noble Douglas fought like so.” You’ll stuff my greedy ears with stories of their bold deeds. But in the end, you’ll stop my ears forever with a sigh that blows away all your words of praise. You will end your story by saying, “Your brother, your son, everyone-dead.”"
"Douglas is living, and your brother yet,","Douglas is alive, and so is your brother, for now. But as for your son, my lord—"
"Why, he is dead. See what a ready tongue suspicion hath! He that but fears the thing he would not know Hath, by instinct, knowledge from others' eyes That what he feared is chancèd. Yet speak, Morton.","Why, he is dead. My suspicion is so quick to speak! When a man fears something, and doesn’t want to know the truth, he can still tell when that thing has happened; by instinct, he can read it in another man’s eyes. But speak, Morton. Tell me, who am an earl, that I have"
And I will take it as a sweet disgrace And make thee rich for doing me such wrong.,"no talent for prophecy. I’ll take it as a pleasant insult, and I’ll pay you richly for doing me that wrong."
"You are too great to be by me gainsaid, Your spirit is too true, your fears too certain.",You are too great a man to be slandered by me. Your instinct is correct; your fears are true.
"I see a strange confession in thine eye. Thou shak’st thy head and hold’st it fear or sin To speak a truth. If he be slain, say so. The tongue offends not that reports his death; Not he which says the dead is not alive. Yet the first bringer of unwelcome news Hath but a losing office, and his tongue Sounds ever after as a sullen bell","But despite all this, don’t say that Percy’s dead. I can see a strange sort of confession in your eyes. You shake your head; you’re afraid to tell the truth, or you think it would be sinful. If he’s been killed, say so. The man who reports a death doesn’t offend with that report. To lie about the dead is a sin, but it is no sin to say that a dead man is not alive. It’s a losing situation, being the first man to bring unwelcome news. That man’s voice sounds forever like a sad bell, and it will always be remembered for tolling the death of a friend."
"I cannot think, my lord, your son is dead.","My lord, I cannot believe your son is dead."
"I am sorry I should force you to believe That which I would to God I had not seen, But these mine eyes saw him in bloody state, To Harry Monmouth; whose swift wrath beat down The never-daunted Percy to the earth, From whence with life he never more sprung up. In few, his death, whose spirit lent a fire Being bruited once, took fire and heat away From the best tempered courage in his troops; For from his metal was his party steeled, Which, once in him abated, all the rest And as the thing that’s heavy in itself Upon enforcement flies with greatest speed,","I’m sorry that I must force you to believe this, when I wish to God that I hadn’t seen it myself. But I saw him, in his bloody state, with my own eyes. He was barely able to fight back, exhausted and out of breath. Harry Monmouth’s swift fury beat the unflinching Percy down to the ground, and once he was there, Percy never rose again. To be brief, Percy’s spirit inspired the entire army, down to the dullest peasant. When the news got out that he had been killed, it took the fire and courage away from even the bravest soldiers. Percy’s metal steeled the whole army; when they learned that he had been blunted, they bent and warped like dull, heavy lead. And just as a heavy object gains momentum once it’s pushed into motion, our army, made heavy by"
"So did our men, heavy in Hotspur’s loss, Lend to this weight such lightness with their fear Than did our soldiers, aiming at their safety, Fly from the field. Then was the noble Worcester Too soon ta'en prisoner; and that furious Scot, The bloody Douglas, whose well-laboring sword Gan vail his stomach and did grace the shame Of those that turned their backs and in his flight, Stumbling in fear, was took. The sum of all Is that the King hath won and hath sent out Under the conduct of young Lancaster And Westmoreland. This is the news at full.","Hotspur’s death, suddenly started moving fast—faster than arrows flying toward a target—but they flew toward safety, not toward the battle. Soon, Worcester, that furious Scotsman, was captured. The warlike Douglas, who killed three enemies disguised as King Henry, began to lose courage: he ran away as well, lending his authority to the shameful retreat. But running in fear, he stumbled and was captured. The bottom line is that King Henry has won. He’s sent a speedy force after you, sir, led by young John of Lancaster and Westmoreland. That is the whole story."
"For this I shall have time enough to mourn. In poison there is physic, and these news, Being sick, have in some measure made me well. And as the wretch whose fever-weakened joints, Like strengthless hinges, buckle under life, Impatient of his fit, breaks like a fire Weakened with grief, being now enraged with grief, Are thrice themselves. Hence therefore, thou nice crutch. A scaly gauntlet now with joints of steel Must glove this hand. And hence, thou sickly coif. Which princes, fleshed with conquest, aim to hit. Now bind my brows with iron, and approach The ragged’st hour that time and spite dare bring To frown upon th'enraged Northumberland. Keep the wild flood confined. Let order die, And let this world no longer be a stage","There will be time to mourn for this. Sometimes poison can be a kind of medicine: this news, which would have made me sick had I been well, has, because I am sick, made me well. A dying man—his joints weakened by fever, dangling like useless hinges and crumpling under the man’s own weight—will sometimes be stuck with a fit of impatience, causing him to burst out of his caretaker’s arms. My limbs are like that now; once weakened by grief, they’re now enraged by grief, and are three times as powerful as they were before. Away from me, you unmanly crutch! Chain mail armor will cover my hands now. Away from me, you invalid’s cap! You are too fanciful a helmet for this head which is now the target of kings, grown arrogant with their victories. Wrap my head in iron, and then attack me with the roughest things that destiny and hatred will dare to bring upon me in my rage. Let the sky come crashing down! Let the ocean overflow the shores! Let law and order die! And let the world no longer be a stage for a long, drawn-out struggle: let the spirit of"
"To feed contention in a lingering act; But let one spirit of the firstborn Cain On bloody courses, the rude scene may end, And darkness be the burier of the dead.","Cain, who committed the first murder against his brother Abel, live in every heart. If every heart is a murderer’s heart, this violent play will end, and darkness will shroud the corpses."
"This strainèd passion doth you wrong, my lord.","This extreme passion is bad for you, sir."
"Sweet Earl, divorce not wisdom from your honor. Lean on your health, the which, if you give o'er To stormy passion, must perforce decay. You cast th' event of war, my noble lord, And summed the account of chance before you said That, in the dole of blows your son might drop. You knew he walked o'er perils on an edge, More likely to fall in than to get o'er. You were advised his flesh was capable Would lift him where most trade of danger ranged. Yet did you say “Go forth,” and none of this, Though strongly apprehended, could restrain The stiff-borne action. What hath then befall'n, More than that being which was like to be?","Gentle Earl, don’t abandon your wisdom. All your allies are depending on you and your well-being. If you allow yourself to indulge in this kind of stormy emotion, your health will deteriorate even further. Before you said, “Let’s raise an army,” you calculated how the war might end, and you thought carefully about the likeliness of a victory. You knew from the beginning that, once the fighting started, your son might die. You knew that he was treading dangerously, as if on the edge of a precipice: you knew he was more likely to fall over than make it across. You were warned that your son was made of flesh and blood, and that it was possible he’d get hurt. You were warned that his temper and hot-headedness would push him into the most dangerous situations. But you still said, “Go forward.” None of this consideration, even though it was clearly understood, could stop the stubborn course of events. So what happened here? What has been the result of this brave undertaking? Only this: precisely what was likely to happen in the first place."
"We all that are engagèd to this loss Knew that we ventured on such dangerous seas That if we wrought out life, ’twas ten to one; Choked the respect of likely peril feared;","We all knew that we were venturing into dangerous waters. 								We knew the odds were ten to one that we would come out alive, and yet we ventured forward anyway. 								The potential reward of winning outweighed the fear of our probable loss."
"And since we are o'erset, venture again. Come, we will all put forth, body and goods.","We lost this time, but let’s try again. Come, we’ll all go for it, body and soul."
"'Tis more than time.—And, my most noble lord, The gentle Archbishop of York is up With well-appointed powers. He is a man Who with a double surety binds his followers. My lord your son had only but the corpse, For that same word “rebellion” did divide The action of their bodies from their souls, And they did fight with queasiness, constrained, As men drink potions, that their weapons only This word “rebellion,” it had froze them up As fish are in a pond. But now the Bishop Turns insurrection to religion. Supposed sincere and holy in his thoughts, And doth enlarge his rising with the blood Of fair King Richard, scraped from Pomfret stones; Derives from heaven his quarrel and his cause; Tells them he doth bestride a bleeding land, And more and less do flock to follow him.","It is the appropriate time. Good sir, I hear for certain, and I tell you truthfully, that the Archbishop of York has raised a powerful army. He motivates his men with both his earthly and his spiritual powers. My lord, your son commanded only his soldiers' bodies. The word “rebellion” frightened them, separating their bodies from their hearts. It caused them to fight timidly, hesitantly, as though they were taking medicine: their weapons seemed to be on our side, but their spirits and souls were frozen, like fish in an icy pond. But now, the Archbishop turns our rebellion into a religious cause. Everyone believes he’s a righteous and holy man, and they follow him not only in body but also in mind. He enhances his cause by preaching about the blood of good King Richard, which was spilled at Pomfret Castle. The Archbishop claims that he derives his authority from heaven; tells the men that the whole country is bleeding, gasping for life under the terrible leadership of Bolingbroke. And so men from every walk of life flock like sheep to follow him."
"I knew of this before, but, to speak truth, This present grief had wiped it from my mind. Go in with me and counsel every man Get posts and letters, and make friends with speed. Never so few, and never yet more need.","I knew all this, but to tell you the truth, this terrible grief had pushed it out of my thoughts. Come inside; I want to hear everyone’s ideas on the best way to defend ourselves and enact our revenge. Send out messengers and letters, and make new allies quickly. Our numbers have never been smaller, but there’s never been more need for what we have to do."
"Sirrah, you giant, what says the doctor to my water?","Sirrah Sirrah = term of address for a person of lower social rank Sirrah , you giant Falstaff is mocking the page for being so small. giant , what did the doctor say about my urine?"
"He said, sir, the water itself was a good healthy water, but, for the party that owed it, he might have more diseases than he knew for.","He said that the urine itself was good, healthy urine, but that the man who owned it probably had more diseases than he could tell."
"foolish-compounded clay, man, is not able to invent anything that tends to laughter more than I invent, or is invented on me. I am not only witty in myself, but the cause that wit is in other men. I do here walk before thee like a sow that hath thee into my service for any other reason than to set me off, why then I have no judgment. Thou whoreson mandrake, thou art fitter to be worn in my cap than to wait at my heels. I was never manned with an agate till now, but I will inset you back again to your master for a jewel. The juvenal, the Prince your master, whose chin is not yet fledge—I will sooner have a beard grow in the palm of my hand than he shall get one off his cheek, and yet he will not stick to say not a hair amiss yet. He may keep it still at a face royal, for a barber shall never earn sixpence out of it, and yet he’ll be crowing as if he had writ man ever since his father was a bachelor. He may keep his own grace, but he’s almost out of","All kinds of people make it a matter of pride to heckle me. No man—that foolishly assembled lump of clay—could ever invent something quite as funny as I seem to be to other people. I’m not only witty on my own, but I bring out wit in other people. Look at the two of us, walking here: I look like a sow that’s smothered all of her baby pigs, except for you. If the Prince sent you to serve me for any other reason than to irritate me, I’m a fool. You weedy little son of a bitch: you’re so tiny that you should be a decoration on my hat, not a servant at my feet. I’ve never had a servant before who was as tiny as a ring stone. But I won’t set you in a gold or silver ring; I’ll wrap you in rags and send you back to your master, to be used as a jewel—that youth, the Prince your master, whose chin is still lacking a beard. Why, I’ll grow a beard in the palm of my hand before he’ll have one that he can shave off his face. And yet, this doesn’t stop him from claiming that he has a face for royalty Falstaff puns on the fact that a “royal” was a kind of coin, stamped with the king’s face. royalty . Well, God will give him a beard whenever he chooses to—there’s not a hair out of place yet. It’s a good thing the Prince’s face is a royal, because a barber will never earn a coin from shaving it. And still, the"
the satin for my short cloak and my slops?,"Prince brags that he’s been a full-grown man since before he was born. He can keep that title, for all I care; I have no affection for him now, I can assure him. What did Master Dommelton say about the satin for my cape and baggy trousers?"
"He said, sir, you should procure him better assurance than Bardolph. He would not take his band and yours. He liked not the security.",He said that you have to give him a better guarantee of payment than just saying Bardolph was good for it. He wouldn’t accept Bardolph’s promise or yours; he felt that neither should be trusted.
"hotter! A whoreson Achitophel, a rascally yea-forsooth knave, to bear a gentleman in hand and then stand upon security! The whoreson smoothy-pates do now wear nothing but high shoes and bunches of keys at their girdles; they must stand upon security. I had as lief they would put ratsbane in my mouth as offer to stop it with “security.” I looked he should have sent me two-and-twenty yards of satin, as I am a true knight, and he sends me “security.” Well, and the lightness of his wife shines through it, and yet cannot he see though he have his own lantern to light him. Where’s Bardolph?","Damn him to hell then, just like Dives in the Bible—the rich glutton who rejected the beggar Lazarus! And may Dommelton burn even hotter! He’s a son-of-a-bitch traitor! A two-faced liar, who smiles and says “Yes sir, that’ll be fine” to my face, and then demands a guarantee of payment! These bastard shopkeepers, with their fashionable short haircuts, and fancy shoes, and their fat key chains on their belts—you make an agreement to put something on credit, and then they throw a “guarantee of payment” at you. I would rather eat rat poison than guarantee my payment. I expected him to send me twenty-two yards of satin, and instead he sends me a “guarantee of payment.” Well, let him guarantee himself a good night’s sleep. After all, his wife’s in somebody else’s bed, so why not? She’s practically shining a spotlight on her adultery, but he’s so clueless he can’t even tell. Where’s Bardolph?"
He’s gone into Smithfield to buy your Worship a horse.,"He went to Smithfield to buy you a horse, sir."
"I bought him in Paul’s, and he’ll buy me a horse in Smithfield. An I could get me but a wife in the stews, I were manned, horsed, and wived.","I bought Bardolph at St. Paul’s Cathedral Unemployed men waited at St. Paul’s Cathedral to be hired for short-term jobs. The nearby Smithfield was a livestock market; horses bought there were considered cheap nags. St. Paul’s Cathedral , and he’s buying me a horse in Smithfield. Now if he could just find me a wife in a whorehouse, I’d be fully stocked with high-quality servants, horses, and wives."
"Sir, here comes the nobleman that committed the Prince for striking","Sir, here comes the man who put the Prince in jail for hitting him during that argument about Bardolph."
Wait close. I will not see him.,Hide; I don’t want to talk to him.
What’s he that goes there?,Who is that man?
"Falstaff, an ’t please your Lordship.","Falstaff, if it please you, sir."
He that was in question for the robbery?,The man who was a suspect in that robbery?
"Shrewsbury, and, as I hear, is now going with some charge to the Lord John of Lancaster.","That’s the one. But he did good work in the Battle of Shrewsbury, and I hear he’s taking some soldiers to help Lord John of Lancaster."
"What, to York? Call him back again.","Where, to York? Tell him to come here."
Sir John Falstaff!,Sir John Falstaff!
"Boy, tell him I am deaf.","Boy, tell him I’m deaf."
You must speak louder. My master is deaf.,You have to speak up; my master is deaf.
"I am sure he is, to the hearing of any thing good.—Go pluck him by the elbow. I must speak with him.","I’m sure he is, when anything good’s being said. Go, tap him on the shoulder. I must speak with him."
Sir John!,Sir John!
"What, a young knave and begging? Is there not wars? Is not the rebels need soldiers? Though it be a shame to be on any side but one, it is worse shame to beg than to be on the","What? A young troublemaker? A beggar? Isn’t there a war on? Isn’t there work to do? Doesn’t the King need subjects? Don’t the rebels need soldiers? Though it’s shameful to be on any side but the King’s, it’s even more shameful to be an idle beggar than a soldier on"
"worst side, were it worse than the name of rebellion can tell how to make it.",wrong side—even if the rebellion were more despicable than the word “rebellion” already leads me to believe.
"You mistake me, sir.","You’re mistaken, sir."
"Why sir, did I say you were an honest man? Setting my knighthood and my soldiership aside, I had lied in my throat if I had said so.","Why is that? Did I say you were an honest man? Because, setting aside the fact that I’m knight and a soldier, I’d be nothing but a liar if I said that."
"I pray you, sir, then set your knighthood and our soldiership you say I am any other than an honest man.","Then please, sir, set aside your knighthood and your soldiership and let me tell you that you’re a deliberate liar, if you say I’m anything other than an honest man."
"I give thee leave to tell me so? I lay aside that which grows to me? If thou gett’st any leave of me, hang me; if thou tak’st leave, thou wert better be hanged. You hunt counter. Hence!","Should I allow you to say that? Should I set aside something that’s mine by right? If I allow you anything, hang me. If you allow yourself, hang you. You’re running in the wrong direction: get out of here! Go!"
"Sir, my lord would speak with you.","Sir, my master wants to speak with you."
"Sir John Falstaff, a word with you.","Sir John Falstaff, I’d like a word with you."
"My good lord. God give your Lordship good time of the day. I am glad to see your Lordship abroad. I heard say your advice. Your Lordship, though not clean past your youth, have yet some smack of an ague in you, some relish of the saltness of time in you, and I most humbly beseech your Lordship to have a reverent care of your health.","My good sir! God grant you a good day! It’s great to see you out and about: I’d heard you were sick. I hope your doctor knows you’re out. Though you’re not entirely past your youth, your lordship, you have a touch of age in you, a touch of the passage of time, and I must humbly urge you to take good care of your health."
Shrewsbury.,"Sir John, I sent for you to come see me before you left for Shrewsbury."
"An ’t please your Lordship, I hear his Majesty is returned with some discomfort from Wales.","If you don’t mind my saying so, I hear the King is back from Wales and it didn’t go so well."
I talk not of his Majesty. You would not come when I sent,I’m not talking about the King. You didn’t come when I sent for you.
"And I hear, moreover, his Highness is fallen into this same whoreson apoplexy.",And I also hear that the King has fallen into a terrible paralysis.
"Well, God mend him. I pray you let me speak with you.","Well, God give him a speedy recovery. Please, let me speak with you."
"This apoplexy, as I take it, is a kind of lethargy, an ’t please tingling.","His paralysis is, as I understand it, a kind of lethargy, if it please you. It’s a sleepiness in the blood, a nasty tingling."
What tell you me of it? Be it as it is.,Why are you telling me this? Let it be.
"It hath its original from much grief, from study, and perturbation of the brain. I have read the cause of his effects","It comes from heavy sadness; from too much reading, and too much thinking. I read about it in the reference books: it’s a kind of deafness."
"I think you are fallen into the disease, for you hear not what I say to you.","I think you must have that disease as well, because you’re not hearing a word I’m saying."
"Very well, my lord, very well. Rather, an ’t please you, it is the disease of not listening, the malady of not marking, that","Very likely, my lord, very likely. But actually, sir, I have the not-listening disease; I have the not-paying-attention sickness."
"To punish you by the heels would amend the attention of your ears, and I care not if I do become your physician.","The cure for that illness would be to put you in shackles, and I wouldn’t mind being your doctor."
"I am as poor as Job, my lord, but not so patient. Your Lordship may minister the potion of imprisonment to me in your prescriptions, the wise may make some dram of a scruple, or indeed a scruple itself.","I may be as poor as Job In the Bible, Job patiently withstood a series of hardships set on him by God. Job , but I’m not as patient. You may be able to throw me in jail because of my poverty, but some people might have slight reservations about that."
"I sent for you, when there were matters against you for your life, to come speak with me.",I sent for you to come speak with me. There were charges against you that might have earned you the death penalty.
"this land-service, I did not come.","I was advised that, since I was working for the army at the time, I shouldn’t go."
"Well, the truth is, Sir John, you live in great infamy.","The truth is, Sir John, that you are massively notorious."
He that buckles him in my belt cannot live in less.,Anybody who wears a belt this big couldn’t be anything less than massive.
"Your means are very slender, and your waste is great.","Your bank account is thin, and yet you put it to huge waste."
and my waist slender.,I wish it were the other way around: that my bank account were huge and my waist were thin.
You have misled the youthful Prince.,You’ve misled the young Prince.
"The young Prince hath misled me. I am the fellow with the great belly, and he my dog.","The young Prince has misled me. I’m the man with the big belly, and he’s the dog who walks in front of me."
"service at Shrewsbury hath a little gilded over your night’s exploit on Gad’s Hill The robbery at Gad’s Hill occurs in Henry IV, Part One. Gad’s Hill . You may thank th' unquiet time for your quiet o'erposting that action.","Well, I’d rather not open up a wound that’s just healed. The good work you did at Shrewsbury has made up a little for the bad thing you did at Gad’s Hill. You can thank the rebellion for helping you get away with that terrible deed."
My lord.,Really?
"But since all is well, keep it so. Wake not a sleeping wolf.","But since things are calm now, let’s keep them that way. We won’t wake a sleeping wolf."
To wake a wolf is as bad as to smell a fox.,To wake a wolf is as bad as to smell a fox smell a fox = be suspicious smell a fox .
"What, you are as a candle, the better part burnt out.","What? You’re like a candle, half burned out."
"A wassail candle, my lord, all tallow. If I did say of wax, my growth would approve the truth.","Maybe, if I were a big, fat holiday candle made of animal fat. But you’d be better off saying that I’m a wax candle: I keep “waxing” larger and larger."
effect of gravity.,Your gray beard should be a sign that you’re a man of gravity.
"His effect of gravy, gravy, gravy.","I’m a man of gravy, gravy, gravy."
You follow the young Prince up and down like his ill angel.,"You follow the young Prince everywhere, like a false angel on his shoulder."
"Not so, my lord. Your ill angel is light, but I hope he that some respects I grant I cannot go. I cannot tell. Virtue is of so little regard in these costermongers' times that true valor is turned bear-herd; pregnancy is made a tapster, and hath his quick wit wasted in giving reckonings. All the other gifts are not worth a gooseberry. You that are old consider not the capacities of us that are young. You do measure the heat of our livers with the bitterness of your galls, and we that are in the vaward of our youth, I must confess, are wags too.","That’s not so, my lord. False angels angel = a kind of coin; angels were often trimmed of some of their metal; a defective angel could be distinguished from a proper by weighing it on a scale. angels are light, and anyone can see without having to weigh me that I’m too heavy. But I don’t know; in some ways, you’re right. I’m not for these times. Virtue counts for so little in this commercial world of ours. True courage is worthless; it’s only used by animal trainers in the bear-baiting rings. Intelligence is good for nobody but bartenders, who waste their wits totaling up tavern bills. In these mean-spirited days, man’s best qualities aren’t worth a thing. You older folks don’t value us young people. You measure our fiery passion according to your melancholic bitterness. And I have to tell you, those of us who are highly advanced in our youth, we’re spirited as well as young."
"written down old with all the characters of age? Have you not a moist eye, a dry hand, a yellow cheek, a white beard,","You’d add your name to the list of the young? You, who have age written all over you? Don’t you have mucus in your eyes? Dry skin? Jaundice? A white beard? An"
"a decreasing leg, an increasing belly? Is not your voice broken, your wind short, your chin double, your wit single, you yet call yourself young? Fie, fie, fie, Sir John.","arthritic leg? A growing belly? Isn’t your voice scratchy? Your breath short? Your chin doubled? Your last wit abandoned? Isn’t every part of you devastated by age? And still you call yourself young? Shame on you, Sir John."
"My lord, I was born about three of the clock in the afternoon, with a white head and something a round belly. For my voice, I have lost it with halloing and singing of anthems. To old in judgment and understanding. And he that will caper with me for a thousand marks, let him lend me the money, and have at him! For the box of the ear that the Prince gave you, he gave it like a rude prince, and you took it like a repents. Marry, not in ashes and sackcloth, but in new silk and old sack.","Sir, I was born around three o'clock in the afternoon, with a white head and a bit of a round belly. As for my scratchy voice, I lost it through shouting and singing loud songs. But I won’t try to prove how young I am any longer. I have only one trait of old age, and that is wisdom. If somebody wants to challenge me to a dance contest for a thousand- mark mark = unit of currency mark wager, let him hand me the money and off we go. Now, as for the fact that the Prince hit you on the head, he did it like a rude prince and you took it like a sensible gentleman. I reprimanded him for it, and he repents. He’s not wearing the traditional sackcloth and ashes, for sure, but he’s repenting in silk cloth and wine."
"Well, God send the Prince a better companion.",May God send the Prince a better friend!
God send the companion a better prince. I cannot rid my hands of him.,May God send the friend a better prince! I can’t get him off my hands!
are going with Lord John of Lancaster against the Archbishop and the Earl of Northumberland.,"Well, the King has separated you and Prince Harry. I hear you’re going with John of Lancaster to go fight Northumberland and the Archbishop."
"Yea, I thank your pretty sweet wit for it. But look you pray, all you that kiss my Lady Peace at home, that our armies join me, and I mean not to sweat extraordinarily. If it be a hot day and I brandish anything but a bottle, I would I might never spit white again. There is not a dangerous action can peep out his head but I am thrust upon it. Well, I cannot last ever.","Yes, and thanks for reminding me. I hope that all of you who stay home, safe and sound, will say a prayer that we soldiers don’t end up in some hot battle. For, by the Lord, I’ve only packed two shirts, and I don’t want to sweat too much. If things get hot and I pull out any other weapon besides a bottle, I’ll never drink wine again. I get sent out on every dangerous assignment"
"have a good thing, to make it too common. If ye will needs say I am an old man, you should give me rest. I would to God my name were not so terrible to the enemy as it is. I were better to be eaten to death with a rust than to be scoured to","that comes up. Well, I can’t live forever. That’s the thing about the English: when they have something good, they use it continually. If you’re going to insist that I’m an old man, then let me rest. I wish to God the enemy weren’t as scared of me as they are: I’d rather sit and rust than be worn out by all this work."
"Well, be honest, be honest; and God bless your expedition!","Well, stay honest, stay honest. God bless your undertaking."
Will your Lordship lend me a thousand pound to furnish me forth?,Could your lordship lend me a thousand pounds for some equipment I need?
"Not a penny, not a penny. You are too impatient to bear Westmoreland.","Not a penny, not a penny: you’re too impatient to endure adversity. Farewell; give my regards to my kinsman Westmoreland."
"If I do, fillip me with a three-man beetle. A man can no more separate age and covetousness than he can part young limbs and lechery; but the gout galls the one, and the pox pinches","If I do, hit me with a sledgehammer. Old age and greed go together like youth and lust. Gout afflicts one and syphilis plagues the other, so there’s no point in me cursing either the old or the young: they’re both cursed already. Boy!"
Sir.,Sir?
What money is in my purse?,How much money’s in my wallet?
Seven groats and two pence.,About seven groats groat = coin worth four pence groats and two pence.
"I can get no remedy against this consumption of the purse. incurable. Go bear this letter to my Lord of Lancaster, this to the Prince, this to the Earl of Westmoreland; and this to old Mistress Ursula, whom I have weekly sworn to marry since I perceived the first white hair on my chin. About it.","There no way to cure the illness that’s making my wallet waste away; borrowing makes it live a little longer, but the disease is incurable. Bring this letter to Lord John of Lancaster, this one to the Prince, this one to Westmoreland, and this one to Madame Ursula. I’ve promised to marry her every single week since I got my first gray hair. Get going: you know where I’ll be."
"A pox of this gout! Or, a gout of this pox, for the one or the other plays the rogue with my great toe. 'Tis no matter if I do halt. I have the wars for my color, and my pension shall seem the more reasonable. A good wit will make use of","Damn this gout! Or damn this syphilis! One of them is really messing up my big toe. Oh well, it doesn’t matter if I limp. I can blame it on the war, and that will help justify my disability payments. A sharp brain can turn any problem to its advantage. I’ll turn my diseases into cash."
"Thus have you heard our cause and known our means, And, my most noble friends, I pray you all Speak plainly your opinions of our hopes. And first, Lord Marshal, what say you to it?","So that’s what we’re fighting for, and that’s the kind of support we have. Now please, my noble friends, tell me frankly if you think we have a chance. First you, Marshal Mowbray. What do you say?"
But gladly would be better satisfied How in our means we should advance ourselves To look with forehead bold and big enough Upon the power and puissance of the King.,"I absolutely agree with our reasons for fighting. But given our resources, I’d feel better if I knew how we’re going to grow bold and strong enough to defeat this mighty and powerful King."
"To five-and-twenty thousand men of choice, And our supplies live largely in the hope Of great Northumberland, whose bosom burns With an incensèd fire of injuries.","Our army has grown to twenty-five thousand good men. Our reinforcements are coming with Northumberland, and his heart burns with anger over all he’s lost."
Whether our present five-and-twenty thousand May hold up head without Northumberland.,"Then, Lord Hastings, this is the question: can our twenty-five thousand get the job done without Northumberland?"
With him we may.,"With him, we can."
"Yea, marry, there’s the point. But if without him we be thought too feeble, Till we had his assistance by the hand. For in a theme so bloody-faced as this, Conjecture, expectation, and surmise Of aids incertain should not be admitted.","Yes, exactly, and that’s the point. If we’re too weak without him, then I don’t think we should advance until we know that his help is guaranteed. In a fight as bloody as this one, we need to be certain about the status of our supporters: we can’t rely on conjecture, hope, and guesswork when aid isn’t guaranteed."
It was young Hotspur’s cause at Shrewsbury.,"That’s right, Lord Bardolph. That’s what happened to young Hotspur at Shrewsbury."
"It was, my lord; who lined himself with hope, Eating the air on promise of supply, Flatt'ring himself in project of a power And so, with great imagination Proper to madmen, led his powers to death And, winking, leapt into destruction.","That’s true, my lord. Hotspur fortified himself with nothing but hope, and mistook empty words as a true promise of reinforcements. He imagined that a huge army was coming to his aid, but what actually arrived turned out to be even smaller than the smallest of his fantasies. And so, with daydreams that could only belong to a madman, he closed his eyes and leaped into destruction."
"But, by your leave, it never yet did hurt","But, begging your pardon, there’s no harm in making guesses and hopeful strategies."
"Yes, if this present quality of war— Indeed the instant action, a cause on foot— Lives so in hope, as in an early spring We see the appearing buds, which to prove fruit That frosts will bite them. When we mean to build, We first survey the plot, then draw the model, And when we see the figure of the house, Then must we rate the cost of the erection, What do we then but draw anew the model In fewer offices, or at last desist To build at all? Much more in this great work, Which is almost to pluck a kingdom down The plot of situation and the model, Consent upon a sure foundation, Question surveyors, know our own estate, How able such a work to undergo,","Yes, there is. Presently, our armies are already in motion, but putting our hope in them is as ridiculous as expecting that early spring buds will produce fruit: at that time of year, buds are more likely to be killed by frost than to bloom. When we want to put up a building, first we survey the land, and then we draw up a set of plans. Then we calculate the cost, and if we can’t afford it, we revise the plans with fewer rooms, or we decide not to build at all. In the great task we’re attempting—the taking down of one kingdom, and the building of another—we have even more reason to evaluate the land and the plans. We must be certain that the foundation is sound, that the engineer is skilled. We must know precisely what we can afford, how ready and able we are, and we must consider the opposing arguments."
"We fortify in paper and in figures, Using the names of men instead of men, Like one that draws the model of a house Beyond his power to build it, who, half through, A naked subject to the weeping clouds And waste for churlish winter’s tyranny.","Otherwise, it becomes a meaningless exercise: papers and numbers, and names of men rather than real, live men. That’s like drawing up plans for a house you can’t possibly afford, building half of it, and then abandoning the partly-built structure to be ruined by the elements."
"Grant that our hopes, yet likely of fair birth, Should be stillborn and that we now possessed I think we are a body strong enough, Even as we are, to equal with the King.","Let’s suppose that everything we’re hoping for fails to materialize, and the army we have now is as big as it’s going to get. I still think that, even in this condition, we’re a match for the King."
"What, is the King but five-and twenty-thousand?",Why? Does the King only have twenty-five thousand men?
"To us no more, nay, not so much, Lord Bardolph, Are in three heads: one power against the French, And one against Glendower; perforce a third Must take up us. So is the unfirm King In three divided, and his coffers sound","The King isn’t facing us with any more than that—in fact, he doesn’t even have that many, Lord Bardolph. This is a time of war, and the King’s had to divide his army into three sections. One division is fighting the French; one’s fighting Glendower. That leaves a third of his army to fight against us. The King is weak and divided into three, and the coffers of his treasury echo with the sounds of hollow poverty and emptiness."
That he should draw his several strengths together And come against us in full puissance Need not be dreaded.,There’s no reason to fear that he will pull all three divisions together and confront us with his full strength.
"If he should do so, He leaves his back unarmed, the French and Welsh","If he did that, he’d be vulnerable at the rear, and the French and the Welsh would be at his heels. He would never let that happen."
Who is it like should lead his forces hither?,Who’s going to lead his troops against us?
"The Duke of Lancaster and Westmoreland; Against the Welsh, himself and Harry Monmouth; But who is substituted against the French",The Duke of Lancaster and Westmoreland. The King and Harry Monmouth will fight against the Welsh. I don’t know for sure who is in charge of the fight against the French.
"Let us on, And publish the occasion of our arms. The commonwealth is sick of their own choice. Their over-greedy love hath surfeited. An habitation giddy and unsure O thou fond many, with what loud applause Didst thou beat heaven with blessing Bolingbroke Before he was what thou wouldst have him be. And being now trimmed in thine own desires, That thou provok’st thyself to cast him up. So, so, thou common dog, didst thou disgorge Thy glutton bosom of the royal Richard, And now thou wouldst eat thy dead vomit up They that, when Richard lived, would have him die Are now become enamored on his grave. Thou, that threw’st dust upon his goodly head When through proud London he came sighing on Criest now “O earth, yield us that King again, And take thou this!” O thoughts of men accursed! Past and to come seems best; things present, worst.","Let’s continue. We’ll publicly proclaim the reasons we’re fighting. The people are sick of the leadership they themselves supported. They were greedy for it, but now they have overfed. When you build your foundation on the public’s love, you build on shaky and unsure ground. Oh, you foolish masses! You shouted your love for Bolingbroke to the skies, before you knew what he’d turn into. Now that you’re dressed in the things you desired, you monstrous devourer, you’re so full of Bolingbroke that you’re ready to vomit him up. This, you vulgar dog, is just how you emptied your gluttonous stomach of King Richard; and now you want to eat up your dead vomit, and you howl trying to find it. What can you count on in this world? The very people who wanted Richard dead when he was alive are now in love with his corpse. The very people who threw garbage on his noble head when he marched through London in shame behind the admired Bolingbroke are now saying, “Oh Earth, return that King, and take this one!” Curses on men’s thoughts! Only the past and the future appeal to them; whatever they have right now they despise."
Shall we go draw our numbers and set on?,Should we gather our troops and press forward?
"We are time’s subjects, and time bids begone.","Time is our commander, and time proposes we be on our way."
"Master Fang, have you entered the action?","Master Fang, have you filed the lawsuit?"
It is entered.,It’s filed.
Where’s your yeoman? Is ’t a lusty yeoman? Will a' stand to ’t?,Where’s your deputy? Is he a strong deputy? Will he rise to the occasion?
Sirrah! Where’s Snare?,"Sirrah, where’s Snare?"
"O Lord, ay, good Master Snare.",Oh my goodness! Master Snare!
"Here, here.","Here, here."
"Snare, we must arrest Sir John Falstaff.","Snare, we’ve got to arrest Sir John Falstaff."
"Yea, good Master Snare, I have entered him and all.","Yes, good Master Snare. I’ve filed the suit against him and everything."
"It may chance cost some of us our lives, for he will stab.",It could cost some of us our lives: he’ll stab.
"Alas the day, take heed of him. He stabbed me in mine own house, and that most beastly, in good faith. He cares not what mischief he does. If his weapon be out, he will foin like any devil. He will spare neither man, woman, nor child.","Oh my goodness! Watch out for him: he stabbed me in my own house, and it was nasty. I swear, he doesn’t care what trouble he causes. Once he’s got his weapon out, he’ll thrust it like the devil. He won’t spare man, woman, or child."
"If I can close with him, I care not for his thrust.","If I can get close to him, I won’t worry about his thrusting."
"No, nor I neither. I’ll be at your elbow.",Me neither. I’ll be right next to you.
"An I but fist him once, an he come but within my view—","If I can grab him once, if he just comes within my grasp–"
"I am undone by his going. I warrant you, he’s an infinitive thing upon my score. Good Master Fang, hold him sure. continuantly to Pie Corner, saving your manhoods, to buy a saddle, and he is indited to dinner to the Lubber’s Head in Lumbert Street, to Master Smooth’s the silkman. I pray you, since my exion is entered, and my case so openly known to mark is a long one for a poor lone woman to bear, and I have borne, and borne, and borne, and have been fubbed off, and fubbed off, and fubbed off from this day to that day, that it is a shame to be thought on. There is no honesty in such to bear every knave’s wrong. Yonder he comes, and that errant malmsey-nose knave, Bardolph, with him. Do your offices, do your offices, Master Fang and Master Snare, do me, do me, do me your offices.","I’m bankrupt i.e., “he’s run up a bill as big as infinity.” Mistress Quickly has a tendency to comically mangle her phrases. bankrupt from his never paying. He’s run up an infinitive bill with me. Catch him, Master Fang! Don’t let him get away, Master Snare! He’s always going to Pie Corner Pie Corner was a market known for cook’s shops, horses, and sex. “Saddle” is a pun on female genitalia. Pie Corner —sorry to mention it—to buy a saddle. And every day he gets indited indited = invited indited to lunch with Master Smooth the silk seller, at the Leopard’s Head on Lumbert Street. Please bring him to justice. I’ve been entered—I mean, my lawsuit’s been entered at court, and the whole world knows how easy I am—I mean how easy it was for him to rip me off. A hundred marks mark = unit of currency marks is a lot for a poor, solitary woman to take. And I’ve taken it, and taken it, and taken it. And I’ve been fobbed off and fobbed off and fobbed off, day in and day out. It’s horrible to even think about. That’s a terrible way to treat people, unless you think that every woman should be made an ass and an animal, and that she should be opened to every jerk’s molestation. Here he comes, with that notorious wine-faced crook, Bardolph. Do me a favor and do me your jobs, Master Fang and Master Snare. Do me! Do me! Do me a favor and do me your jobs!"
How now! Whose mare’s dead? What’s the matter?,What’s going on? Whose horse died? What’s the matter?
"Sir John, I arrest you at the suit of Mistress Quickly.","Sir John, you’re under arrest for charges brought by Mistress Quickly."
"Away, varlets!—Draw, Bardolph. Cut me off the villain’s head. Throw the quean in the channel.","Get out of here, you crooks! Draw your sword, Bardolph. Cut off this rascal’s head, and throw this whore in the gutter."
"Throw me in the channel? I’ll throw thee in the channel. Wilt Ah, thou honeysuckle villain, wilt thou kill God’s officers and the King’s? Ah, thou honeyseed rogue, thou art a honeyseed, a man-queller, and a woman-queller.","Throw me in the gutter? I’ll throw you in the gutter. You will? You will? You bastardly cheat! Murder! Murder! Oh, you honeysuckle honeysuckle, honey-seed, hemp-seed = homicidal, homicide honeysuckle criminal! You’re going to kill God’s sheriffs, and the King’s? Oh, you honey-seed creep! You’re a honey-seed, a man-killer, and a woman-killer."
"Keep them off, Bardolph.","Keep them off me, Bardolph."
"A rescue, a rescue!",An escape! An escape!
"Good people, bring a rescue or two.— (to FALSTAFF) Thou wot, wot thou? Thou wot, wot ta? Do, do, thou rogue. Do, thou hempseed.","Somebody, bring an escape Mistress Quickly mistakes Fang’s warning as a request for “escapes.” escape or two! (to FALSTAFF) You will, will you? You will, will you? Go ahead, go ahead, you scoundrel! You hemp-seed!"
"Away, you scullion, you rampallion, you fustilarian! I’ll","Get off, you serving wench! You ruffian! You fat old hag! I’ll beat you on the backside!"
"What is the matter? Keep the peace here, ho!",What’s the matter? Let’s have some order here!
"Good my lord, be good to me. I beseech you stand to me.","Good sir, be good to me. I beg you, stand up for me."
"How now, Sir John? What, are you brawling here? Doth this become your place, your time, and business? (to FANG) Stand from him, fellow: wherefore hang’st thou upon him?","Well if it isn’t Sir John! Are you making trouble here? Is this appropriate for a man of your position, your age, and your responsibilities? You should be well on your way to York by now. (to FANG) Get off him, man. Why are you holding him?"
"O my most worshipful lord, an ’t please your Grace, I am a poor widow of Eastcheap, and he is arrested at my suit.","Oh, most excellent lord, begging your pardon: I’m a poor Eastcheap widow, and he’s arrested on charges I brought against him."
For what sum?,What sum does he owe you?
"eaten me out of house and home. He hath put all my substance into that fat belly of his. (to FALSTAFF) But I will have some of it out again, or I will ride thee o' nights like the mare.","It’s more than some, sir: it’s all, all that I have. He’s eaten me out of house and home. He’s put everything I own into that fat belly of his. (to FALSTAFF) But I’ll get some of it back again, or I’ll ride you all night like a bad dream."
I think I am as like to ride the mare if I have any vantage of,"I think I might just ride you, if I get the chance to mount you."
"How comes this, Sir John? Fie, what man of good temper would endure this tempest of exclamation? Are you not ashamed to enforce a poor widow to so rough a course to come by her own?","What is this, Sir John? Damn! How could any decent man put up with this storm of screaming and cursing? Aren’t you ashamed to force a poor widow to take these extreme measures simply to get what’s hers?"
(to MISTRESS QUICKLY) What is the gross sum that I owe thee?,(to MISTRESS QUICKLY) What’s the total I owe you?
"Marry, if thou wert an honest man, thyself and the money too. Thou didst swear to me upon a parcel-gilt goblet, sitting in my Dolphin chamber at the round table by a sea-coal fire, upon Wednesday in Wheeson week, when the Prince broke thou didst swear to me then, as I was washing thy wound, to marry me and make me my lady thy wife. Canst thou deny it? Did not goodwife Keech, the butcher’s wife, come in then and call me Gossip Quickly, coming in to borrow a mess of thou didst desire to eat some, whereby I told thee they were ill for a green wound? And didst thou not, when she was gone downstairs, desire me to be no more so familiarity with","My goodness! If you were an honest man, you’d give yourself to me, as well as the money. You swore to me—over a gold-plated wine goblet, in the Dolphin Room in my tavern, at the round table, next to the fire, on the Wednesday seven weeks after Easter, when the Prince swung at your head for claiming his father was a fake—you swore, while I was cleaning your wounds, to marry me and make me a proper lady and your wife. Can you deny it? Didn’t Mrs. Baconfat, the butcher’s wife, come into the room then and ask to borrow some vinegar, saying that she had some good prawns—and you wanted to eat some, and I told you that it was a bad idea, to eat shrimp when you had a fresh wound—and"
"such poor people, saying that ere long they should call me thirty shillings? I put thee now to thy book-oath. Deny it if thou canst.","when she left, didn’t you tell me to stop being friends with low types like her, because before long we’d be married and I’d be a proper lady? And didn’t you kiss me and tell me to lend you thirty shillings shillings = unit of currency shillings ? Put your hand on the bible and deny it, if you dare."
"My lord, this is a poor mad soul, and she says up and down the town that her eldest son is like you. She hath been in good these foolish officers, I beseech you I may have redress against them.","Sir, this is a poor, insane soul. She’s been saying all over town that her oldest son looks just like you. She was once rich, but poverty has driven her crazy. Now, as for these two foolish officers, I would like to press charges against them."
"Sir John, Sir John, I am well acquainted with your manner of wrenching the true cause the false way. It is not a more than impudent sauciness from you, can thrust me from a level consideration. You have, as it appears to me, practiced upon the easy-yielding spirit of this woman, and made her serve your uses both in purse and in person.","Sir John, Sir John. I know too well how you are accustomed to turning the truth into a big lie. But neither your confident demeanor nor the storm of words that accompanies your insolent disrespect will sway me from making a just consideration. As far as I can see, you’ve taken advantage of this trusting woman, and you’ve made her give you cash and other favors."
"Yea, in truth, my lord.","Yes, truthfully, sir."
"Pray thee, peace.— (to FALSTAFF) Pay her the debt you owe her, and unpay the villany you have done her. The one you may do with sterling money, and the other with current repentance.","Quiet, please. (to FALSTAFF) Pay her what you owe her, and undo the wrongdoings you’ve done to her. You can do the first with money, and the second with a sincere apology."
"honorable boldness “impudent sauciness.” If a man will make curtsy and say nothing, he is virtuous. No, my lord, my humble duty remembered, I will not be your suitor. I say to you, I do desire deliverance from these officers, being upon","Sir, I will not put up with this snub without a reply. You call my brave, honorable dealings insolent disrespect. Does a man have to stand here, silent and bowing, to be a virtuous man? No, sir. With all due respect, I won’t bow down to you. I say that I want to be set free by these officers, seeing as I have urgent work to do for the King."
"You speak as having power to do wrong; but answer in th' effect of your reputation, and satisfy this poor woman.",You talk as though you have permission to break the law. But act appropriately to your status: satisfy this poor woman.
"Come hither, hostess.","Come here, hostess."
"Now, Master Gower, what news?","Master Gower, what’s going on?"
Are near at hand. The rest the paper tells.,"My lord, the King and Harry Prince of Wales are nearby. This letter will tell you the rest."
As I am a gentleman!,On my honor.
"Faith, you said so before.","Honestly, that’s what you said before."
As I am a gentleman. Come. No more words of it.,"On my honor. Come, let’s not talk about it anymore."
both my plate and the tapestry of my dining chambers.,"By heaven above and below, I’ll have to pawn my good china and the tapestries in my dining rooms."
"Glasses, glasses, is the only drinking. And for thy walls, a pretty slight drollery, or the story of the Prodigal or the German hunting in waterwork is worth a thousand of these pound, if thou canst. Come, an ’twere not for thy humors, there’s not a better wench in England. Go wash thy face, and draw the action. Come, thou must not be in this humor with me. Dost not know me? Come, come, I know thou wast set","It’s not such a big deal. Glass is the only good thing to drink out of anyway. And as for the walls The Biblical tale of the prodigal son, who wastes his inheritance before contritely returning to his father’s house, was a popular subject for wall decorations. walls , something pretty and comical—or a depiction of the prodigal son; or maybe one of those German hunting scenes, painted on the wall to look like a tapestry—why, those are worth a thousand of those bed curtains and moth-eaten tapestries. Let me borrow just ten pounds, all right? Come on—other than your moodiness, you’re the best wench in England. Go wash your face and withdraw the lawsuit. Come on—don’t be this way with me. Don’t you know me? Come, come, I know somebody put you up to this."
"Pray thee, Sir John, let it be but twenty nobles. I' faith, I am loath to pawn my plate, so God save me, la.","Please, Sir John, let’s call it twenty nobles noble = unit of currency; twenty nobles = approximately six pounds twenty nobles . I don’t want to have to pawn my china, in God’s name!"
Let it alone. I’ll make other shift. You’ll be a fool still.,"All right, forget it. I’ll figure something else out. You’ll always be a fool."
"Well, you shall have it, though I pawn my gown. I hope","All right, I’ll lend it to you, even if I have to pawn my clothes. I hope you’ll have dinner here tonight. You’ll pay me the full amount then?"
"Will I live? (to BARDOLPH) Go with her, with her. Hook on, hook on.","Will I live? (to BARDOLPH) Go, stick with her, stick with her. Don’t let her out of your sight."
Will you have Doll Tearsheet meet you at supper?,Do you want Doll Tearsheet to meet you at dinner?
No more words. Let’s have her.,No more talking. Let’s have her.
I have heard better news.,I’ve heard better news.
"What’s the news, my good lord?","What’s the news, my lord?"
Where lay the King last night?,Where did the King spend last night?
"At Basingstoke, my lord.","At Basingstoke, sir."
"I hope, my lord, all’s well. What is the news, my lord?","I hope everything’s okay, sir. What’s the news?"
Come all his forces back?,And his armies have come back?
"No; fifteen hundred foot, five hundred horse Are marched up to my Lord of Lancaster Against Northumberland and the Archbishop.","No. Fifteen hundred infantrymen and five hundred horsemen are marching to meet Lord Lancaster, to fight against Northumberland and the Archbishop."
"Comes the King back from Wales, my noble lord?","Is the King back from Wales, my noble lord?"
"Come. Go along with me, good Master Gower.","I’ll give you some letters shortly. Come with me, Master Gower."
My lord!,Sir!
What’s the matter?,What’s the matter?
"Master Gower, shall I entreat you with me to dinner?","Master Gower, would you like to join me for lunch?"
John.,"I have to attend to this noble man right here. But thank you, Sir John."
"Sir John, you loiter here too long, being you are to take soldiers up in counties as you go.","Sir John, you’ve been loitering here too long. You have to recruit soldiers in the counties you pass through on your way north."
"Will you sup with me, Master Gower?","Will you join me for supper, then, Master Gower?"
"What foolish master taught you these manners, Sir John?","What foolish teacher taught you these manners, Sir John?"
"Master Gower, if they become me not, he was a fool that taught them me.—This is the right fencing grace, my lord: tap for tap, and so part fair.","Master Gower, if my manners Falstaff is referencing an earlier part of the scene, when the Chief Justice similarly ignored Falstaff. manners are inappropriate, I must have indeed been taught by a fool. That’s how the game is played—tit for tat, and game over."
Now the Lord lighten thee. Thou art a great fool.,God help you! You are a great fool.
"Before God, I am exceeding weary.","I swear to God, I’m exceedingly tired."
Is ’t come to that? I had thought weariness durst not have attached one of so high blood.,Really? I would have thought that weariness wouldn’t dare afflict someone as highly born as you.
"Faith, it does me; though it discolors the complexion of my to desire small beer?","Well, it afflicts me, although saying so dims my nobility somewhat. Does it make me seem coarse and common to say that I’d love a small beer small beer = a kind of weak, thin beer small beer ?"
"Why, a prince should not be so loosely studied as to remember so weak a composition.",A prince shouldn’t be vulgarly inclined toward things like small beer.
"Belike then my appetite was not princely got, for, by my indeed these humble considerations make me out of love with my greatness. What a disgrace is it to me to remember thy name, or to know thy face tomorrow, or to take note how many pair of silk stockings thou hast—with these, and those of thy shirts, as, one for superfluity and another for use. But that the tennis-court keeper knows better than I, for it is a low ebb of linen with thee when thou keepest not racket there, as thou hast not done a great while, because the rest of God knows whether those that bawl out the ruins of thy linen shall inherit His kingdom; but the midwives say the children are not in the fault, whereupon the world increases and kindreds are mightily strengthened.","Then I suppose don’t have a prince’s appetite, because right now all I can think about is small beer. But it’s true: all these everyday considerations distance me from my own nobility. It’s disgraceful that I should be familiar with a man like you! To know your name, your face, and your wardrobe so intimately that I know that you have two pairs of stockings: the ones you’re wearing now, and those peach-colored ones. I even know how many shirts you have: one to wear, and one extra. But then, the keeper of the tennis courts knows your wardrobe better than I do, for when you’ve run out of clean shirts, you don’t show up to play. And you haven’t played in a while, because the whore houses have eaten all the rest of your money, which you’d otherwise use to buy more shirts. God only knows whether all the crying brats you’ve fathered will make it to heaven. But then, the midwives say that babies don’t bear the sins of the parents. That’s how the population increases, and families are strengthened."
"talk so idly! Tell me, how many good young princes would do so, their fathers being so sick as yours at this time is?","It seems wrong, after all your hard work in battle, that you should be spending your time now in idle chatter. How many other princes would behave like this if their fathers were as sick as yours?"
"Shall I tell thee one thing, Poins?","Can I tell you something, Poins?"
"Yes, faith, and let it be an excellent good thing.",Sure; and make sure it’s an excellent thing.
It shall serve among wits of no higher breeding than thine.,"It’ll be fine, for people who aren’t any smarter than you are."
Go to. I stand the push of your one thing that you will tell.,Go ahead. I’m can take whatever you have to say.
"Marry, I tell thee it is not meet that I should be sad, now my father is sick—albeit I could tell thee, as to one it pleases me, for fault of a better, to call my friend, I could be sad, and sad","Here it is, then. It’s not seemly for me to be sad over my father’s illness. But I could tell you—as a person who, for lack of anyone else, I’m pleased to call my friend—that I could be sad. I could be very sad, indeed."
"Very hardly, upon such a subject.",It would be difficult to feel that way over a thing like this.
"By this hand, thou thinkest me as far in the devil’s book as thou and Falstaff for obduracy and persistency. Let the end try the man. But I tell thee, my heart bleeds inwardly that my hath in reason taken from me all ostentation of sorrow.","I swear, you must think that I’m as sinful as you and Falstaff are, and as stubborn and persistent. We’ll see about that. But I’m telling you: my heart is bleeding for my father, and for his illness. But because I’m hanging out with lowlifes like you, I can’t show how sorrowful I am."
The reason?,Why?
What wouldst thou think of me if I should weep?,What would you think of me if I started crying?
I would think thee a most princely hypocrite.,I would think you’re a royal hypocrite.
fellow to think as every man thinks. Never a man’s thought in the world keeps the roadway better than thine. Every man would think me an hypocrite indeed. And what accites your most worshipful thought to think so?,"That’s what everyone would be thinking. And what’s great about you is that you think just the way everyone else does: nobody sticks to popular opinion quite as well as you. Everyone would think I was a hypocrite, indeed. And, your honor, what makes you think that?"
to Falstaff.,"Because you’ve behaved so badly, and because you’re so attached to Falstaff."
And to thee.,And to you.
"By this light, I am well spoke on. I can hear it with my own ears. The worst that they can say of me is that I am a second two things, I confess, I cannot help. By the Mass, here comes Bardolph.","Honestly, people think highly of me; I hear their praises with my own ears. The worst thing they can say about me is that, as a younger brother, I’ve had no inheritance from my family, and that I’m a good fighter. And I can’t help either of those things. By God, here comes Bardolph."
"And the boy that I gave Falstaff. He had him from me Christian, and look if the fat villain have not transformed","And the boy who I sent to work for Falstaff. He was a normal boy when I sent him, and now look: the fat bastard’s turned him into an ape. Possibly, Falstaff has dressed his page in a ridiculous outfit. the fat bastard’s turned him into an ape."
God save your Grace.,God save your grace!
"And yours, most noble Bardolph.","And yours, most noble Bardolph!"
"(to BARDOLPH) Come, you virtuous ass, you bashful fool, must you be blushing? Wherefore blush you now? What a to get a pottle-pot’s maidenhead?","(to BARDOLPH) Come on, you principled ass, you timid fool! Why are you blushing? What a womanly solider you are! Is it that big a deal to deflower a two-quart tankard of ale Poins and the page are joking about Bardolph’s face, which is red from drinking. tankard of ale ?"
"He calls me e'en now, my lord, through a red lattice, and I could discern no part of his face from the window. At last I spied his eyes, and methought he had made two holes in the","Just now he called to me from behind a red window shade, and I couldn’t tell his face from the curtain! Finally I saw his eyes, and I thought he’d made two holes in a whore’s skirt and peeped through them!"
Has not the boy profited?,"This kid’s learned a lot from Falstaff, hasn’t he?"
"Away, you whoreson upright rabbit, away!","Get out of here, you little rabbit! Get out!"
"Away, you rascally Althea’s dream, away!","You get out, you rotten Althea’s dream!"
"Instruct us, boy. What dream, boy?","What dream, boy? Tell us."
"firebrand, and therefore I call him her dream.","Sir, Althea dreamed she gave birth to a red-hot iron. That’s why I call him her dream; he’s all red in the face."
"A crown’s worth of good interpretation. There ’tis, boy.","That joke’s worth a crown crown = kind of coin crown ! Here you go, boy."
"O, that this good blossom could be kept from cankers! Well, there is sixpence to preserve thee.","I wish this wholesome little flower could be kept away from disease. Well, here’s a sixpence for you."
shall have wrong.,"If between the three of you this boy doesn’t end up hanged, the gallows will be cheated."
"And how doth thy master, Bardolph?","How’s your master Falstaff doing, Bardolph?"
"Well, my good lord. He heard of your Grace’s coming to town. There’s a letter for you.","Fine, sir. He heard you were coming to town. Here’s a letter for you."
your master?,"Delivered very respectfully. How is that fattened calf, your boss?"
"In bodily health, sir.","His body’s healthy, sir."
"Marry, the immortal part needs a physician, but that moves not him. Though that be sick, it dies not.","That’s right, it’s just his immortal soul that needs a doctor. But he doesn’t care. His soul may be sick, but it won’t die."
"me as my dog, and he holds his place, for look you how be writes. (he hands the letter to POINS)","(reads to himself) I allow this wart to be as familiar with me as my dog, and he holds onto his privileged position. Listen to how he writes. (he hands the letter to POINS)"
"(reads) John Falstaff, knight. Every man must know that as oft as he has occasion to name himself, even like those that say, “There’s some of the King’s blood spilt.” “How comes that?” says he that takes upon him not to conceive. The answer is as ready as a borrower’s cap: “I am the King’s poor cousin, sir.”","(reads) “John Falstaff, knight”—he always throws that title around, every chance he gets. It’s like people who are related to the King: every time they get a tiny cut, they say, “Some of the King’s blood has been spilled.” Then someone pretends not to get it, and asks, “How do you mean?” The answer comes faster than a beggar can whip out his cap: “I’m the King’s poor relative.”"
"Nay, they will be kin to us, or they will fetch it from Japheth. 								But to the letter. (takes the letter and reads) Sir John 									alstaff, knight, to the son of the King nearest his father, 									Harry Prince of Wales, greeting.","Right. They all say they’re related to us, even if they have to trace the family tree all the way back to Japhet, the common ancestor of all Europeans. But back to the letter. (takes the letter and reads) “Sir John Falstaff—knight to the son of the King, nearest to his father, Harry Prince of Wales—sends his greetings.”"
"Why, this is a certificate.",Listen to that. It sounds like a contract.
Peace! (reads) I will imitate the honorable Romans in 									brevity.,Quiet! (reads) “I will copy the Romans in shortness.”
"He sure means brevity in breath, short-winded.","He must mean shortness of breath, and wheezing."
"(reads) I commend me to thee, I commend thee, and I leave 									thee. Be not too familiar with Poins, for he misuses thy 									favors so much that he swears thou art to marry his sister","(reads) “I salute myself, I salute you, and I’m done. Don’t get too close to Poins. He takes such rampant advantage of your kindness that he swears you will marry his sister Nell. Confess your sins when you have the time; and with that, farewell. Yours up and down"
"Nell. Repent at idle times as thou mayest, and so, farewell. 									Thine by yea and no, which is as much as to say, as thou usest 									him, Jack Falstaff with my familiars, John with my brothers 									and sisters, and Sir John with all Europe.","(which is to say, in whatever way you feel like), I remain Jack Falstaff to my friends, John to my brothers and sisters, and Sir John to all Europe.”"
"My lord, I’ll steep this letter in sack and make him eat it.","Sir, I’ll soak this letter in wine and shove it down his throat."
"That’s to make him eat twenty of his words. But do you use me thus, Ned? Must I marry your sister?","That would be making him eat twenty of his words. But are you taking advantage of me like he says, Ned? Must I marry your sister?"
God send the wench no worse fortune! But I never said so.,It would be her lucky day if you did. But I never said that.
"Well, thus we play the fools with the time, and the spirits of master here in London?","Well, we’re wasting time, and the angels in heaven are mocking us. (to BARDOLPH) Is your boss here in London?"
"Yea, my lord.","Yes, my lord."
Where sups he? Doth the old boar feed in the old frank?,Where’s he eating tonight? Is the old pig eating in the old sty?
"At the old place, my lord, in Eastcheap.","At the old place, my lord. In Eastcheap."
What company?,Who’s with him?
"Ephesians, my lord, of the old church.",The usual old characters.
Sup any women with him?,Are any women eating with him?
"None, my lord, but old Mistress Quickly and Mistress Doll Tearsheet.",No women sir. Just old Mistress Quickly and Mistress Doll Tearsheet.
What pagan may that be?,What heathen is that?
"A proper gentlewoman, sir, and a kinswoman of my master’s.","A proper lady, sir, and my master’s relative."
"Even such kin as the parish heifers are to the town bull.— Shall we steal upon them, Ned, at supper?","Exactly the kind of relative as the country cows are to the town bull. Ned, should we spy on them as they eat supper?"
"I am your shadow, my lord. I’ll follow you.","I’m after you like a shadow, my lord: I’ll follow you."
"Sirrah—you, boy—and Bardolph, no word to your master that I am yet come to town. (gives them money) There’s for your silence.","Sirrah, you boy, and you, Bardolph—don’t tell your master that I’m back in town. (gives them money) This is for your silence."
"I have no tongue, sir.","I have no tongue to speak with, sir."
"And for mine, sir, I will govern it.","As for my tongue, I’ll manage it."
Fare you well. Go.,Farewell to you both; go now.
This Doll Tearsheet should be some road.,This Doll Tearsheet must be some road road = slang for “common prostitute” road .
"I warrant you, as common as the way between Saint Alban’s and London.","Truly, she’s as well-traveled as the highway to London."
"colors, and not ourselves be seen?","How can we see Falstaff behave like his true self tonight, and yet not be detected ourselves?"
"Put on two leathern jerkins and aprons, and wait upon him at his table as drawers.",We’ll put on leather jackets and aprons and wait upon him as bartenders.
"From a god to a bull: a heavy decension. It was Jove’s case. be mine, for in everything the purpose must weigh with the folly. Follow me, Ned.","Should a God disguise himself as a bull? That’s quite a degradation. Well, Jove The Roman god Jove disguised himself as a white bull to carry away the maiden Europa Jove did it. And should a prince disguise himself as an apprentice bartender and transform into something so lowly? Yes, I will: in every undertaking, the ends must match the means. Follow me, Ned."
"I pray thee, loving wife and gentle daughter, Give even way unto my rough affairs. Put not you on the visage of the times And be, like them, to Percy troublesome.","Please, my loving wife and sweet daughter-in-law, support me in my difficult tasks. Don’t let the grimness of these days be reflected in your faces; don’t add to Percy’s troubles."
Do what you will; your wisdom be your guide.,I give up; I won’t say any more. Do what you want. Let your wisdom guide you.
"Alas, sweet wife, my honor is at pawn, And, but my going, nothing can redeem it.","For goodness sake, sweet wife, my honor is at stake. Nothing can redeem it except my going."
"O yet, for God’s sake, go not to these wars. When you were more endeared to it than now, When your own Percy, when my heart’s dear Harry, Threw many a northward look to see his father Bring up his powers; but he did long in vain. There were two honors lost, yours and your son’s. For yours, the God of heaven brighten it. For his, it stuck upon him as the sun In the gray vault of heaven, and by his light To do brave acts. He was indeed the glass Wherein the noble youth did dress themselves. He had no legs that practiced not his gait; And speaking thick, which nature made his blemish, For those that could speak low and tardily Would turn their own perfection to abuse","For God’s sake, don’t go to these wars! Father-in-law, you once broke your word when you had better reason to keep it than you do now. Your own son Percy—my heart’s beloved Harry—looked northward again and again, hoping to see his father coming with an army. But he hoped in vain. Who persuaded you to stay home that time? Two honors were lost in that battle: yours, and your son’s. As for yours, I hope God will make it shine again. As for Harry’s honor, it clung to him like the sun in a pale blue sky, and by its light every knight in England was moved to act bravely. He was the mirror in which noble youths dressed themselves. All men copied his way of walking, except those who had no legs. And talking loudly and quickly—the one flaw nature had given him—became the speech pattern for all brave men. Those who spoke softly and slowly would corrupt their proper speech, just to seem more like"
"To seem like him. So that in speech, in gait, In diet, in affections of delight, He was the mark and glass, copy and book, That fashioned others. And him—O wondrous him! O miracle of men!—him did you leave, Second to none, unseconded by you, In disadvantage, to abide a field Where nothing but the sound of Hotspur’s name Did seem defensible. So you left him. Never, O never, do his ghost the wrong With others than with him. Let them alone. The Marshal and the Archbishop are strong. Had my sweet Harry had but half their numbers, Today might I, hanging on Hotspur’s neck,","Harry. In speech, bearing, and diet; in inclinations toward pleasure, in military actions, and in moods, he was the target, mirror, example, and rulebook that other men followed. And him—Oh wondrous him! Oh miracle of men!—you left him! The best man in the world, unsupported by you, faced the hideous god of war from a position of weakness. His only defense was the sound of his own name, and that is how you left him. Never insult his memory by letting your honor count more with strangers than with him. Leave them alone: Marshal Mowbray and the Archbishop are strong. If my darling Harry had had half their army, I might be hanging on his neck today, talking about Prince Hal’s grave."
"Beshrew your heart, Fair daughter, you do draw my spirits from me With new lamenting ancient oversights. But I must go and meet with danger there, Or it will seek me in another place","For goodness sake, pretty daughter-in-law. You take me out of myself, reminding me again of these past mistakes. But I must go and face danger there or danger will find me somewhere else, where I will be less prepared."
"Oh, fly to Scotland Till that the nobles and the armèd commons Have of their puissance made a little taste.","Oh, run to Scotland until these noblemen and their armies have skirmished against the king."
"If they get ground and vantage of the King, Then join you with them like a rib of steel First let them try themselves. So did your son; He was so suffered. So came I a widow, And never shall have length of life enough","If they make any headway against the King, then join them, and like a steel rod make their strength even stronger. But in the name of the love you feel for us, let them begin on their own. That’s how your son fought. You allowed him to do that, and that’s how I became a widow. If I spend the rest of my life pouring tears on"
To rain upon remembrance with mine eyes For recordation to my noble husband.,"the plant of remembrance, it will never grow tall enough to pay proper tribute to my extraordinary husband."
"Come, come, go in with me. 'Tis with my mind As with the tide swelled up unto his height, That makes a still-stand, running neither way. But many thousand reasons hold me back. I will resolve for Scotland. There am I Till time and vantage crave my company.","Come. Come. Go inside with me. My thoughts are like the ocean at high tide—neither coming in nor going out, seeming to stand still. I want to go join the Archbishop, but many thousands of reasons are holding me back. I’ll go to Scotland and wait there till events unfold and my help is called for."
What the devil hast thou brought there—applejohns? Thou knowest Sir John cannot endure an applejohn.,"What the hell have you got there? Apple johns apple johns = a variety of apple, eaten once the fruit is shriveled Apple johns ? You know Sir John can’t stand apple johns."
"Mass, thou sayest true. The Prince once set a dish of applejohns before him and told him there were five more Sir of these six dry, round, old, withered knights.” It angered him to the heart. But he hath forgot that.","Damn, you’re right. One day the Prince put a plate of apple-johns in front of Falstaff and said, “Here are five more Sir Johns.” Then the Prince took off his hat and said, “I’m now going to bid farewell to these six dry, round, old, withered knights.” It angered Sir John deeply, but he got over it."
"Why then, cover, and set them down, and see if thou canst find out Sneak’s noise. Mistress Tearsheet would fain hear","Well then, put the table cloth on and set the dish down. Go see if you can find Sneak’s band of musicians. Mistress Tearsheet wants to hear some music."
Dispatch: the room where they supped is too hot. They’ll come in straight.,"Hurry! The room they ate in was too hot, and they’ll be here any minute."
"Sirrah, here will be the Prince and Master Poins anon, and they will put on two of our jerkins and aprons, and Sir John","Sirrah, the Prince and Poins will be here soon. They’re going to put on a couple of our jackets and aprons. Sir John can’t know it’s them. Bardolph came and told me."
"By the Mass, here will be old utis. It will be an excellent stratagem.","Well, there’s going to be hilarity here! What a great scheme!"
I’ll see if I can find out Sneak.,I’ll see if I can find Sneak.
"I' faith, sweetheart, methinks now you are in an excellent heart would desire, and your color, I warrant you, is as red as any rose, in good truth, la. But, i' faith, you have drunk too much canaries, and that’s a marvellous searching wine, and it perfumes the blood ere one can say “What’s this?”","I swear, sweetheart, you seem to be in a great temporality temporality = temper temporality . Your pulsidge pulsidge = pulse pulsidge is beating as strongly as you could want, and your color is as red as a rose; truly! But seriously, I do think you’ve drank too much of that sweet wine from the Canary Islands—it’s a mighty powerful drink, and it’ll get into your blood faster than you can say, “What’s this?” How are you feeling now?"
Better than I was. Hem.,Better than I was before. (she coughs or belches)
"Why, that’s well said. A good heart’s worth gold. Lo, here comes Sir John.","Well said! A healthy heart is worth its weight in gold. Look, here comes Sir John."
(sings) When Arthur first in court—Empty the jordan.,"(singing) “When Arthur first in court”—somebody empty the chamber pot! “And was a worthy king” The lyrics are from a popular ballad of the time, “Sir Lancelot du Lake.” “When Arthur first in court”—somebody empty the chamber pot! “And was a worthy king” —how are you, Mistress Doll?"
"Sick of a calm, yea, good faith.","She’s sick of a qualm qualm = nausea, or a fainting spell qualm , she is."
"So is all her sect. An they be once in a calm, they are sick.",That’s how all the women in her profession are. As soon as they’re calm—and not in someone’s bed—they get sick.
"A pox damn you, muddy rascal. Is that all the comfort you give me?",You stupid bastard. Is this how you make me feel better?
"You make fat rascals, Mistress Doll.","You make fat bastards, Mistress Doll."
I make them? Gluttony and diseases make them; I make them not.,I make them fat? Gluttony and disease will make men fat; I have nothing to do with it.
"If the cook help to make the gluttony, you help to make the diseases, Doll. We catch of you, Doll, we catch of you. Grant","Well, cooks help create gluttony, by making and selling food—the object of gluttony. And you help create diseases, Doll. We catch them from you, Doll, we catch them from you: admit it."
"Yea, joy, our chains and our jewels.","Sure, sweetheart. You catch us by the chains and the jewels, and then you steal them from us."
"Your broaches, pearls, and ouches—for to serve bravely is to come halting off, you know; to come off the breach with his pike bent bravely, and to surgery bravely, to venture upon","“Your brooches, pearls, and gems” This might be a line from a ballad. “Ouches,” in the original Shakespearean line, meant both “gem, brooch, or buckle” and “sore.” Falstaff jokes that the “jewels” men get from Doll are the sores of a venereal disease. brooches, pearls, and gems” —We fight bravely and then come away limping. We retreat from the breach in the wall with our weapons bravely bent. We head off to the doctor, bravely. And then we charge into the loaded chambers Falstaff describes a bout of venereal disease as a military battle. loaded chambers again, bravely."
"Hang yourself, you muddy conger, hang yourself!","Drop dead, you filthy eel. Drop dead!"
"By my troth, this is the old fashion. You two never meet but you fall to some discord. You are both, i' good truth, as rheumatic as two dry toasts. You cannot one bear with and that must be you. You are the weaker vessel, as they say, the emptier vessel.","I swear In Shakespeare’s line, Mistress Quickly mistakenly uses “rheumatic” for “choleric” (i.e., irritable) and “confirmities” for “infirmities.” swear , this is how it always is. You two even see each other without fighting. You’re as hot as dry toast, you can’t stand each other’s bad qualities. Good grief! But one of you has to bear the burden, and that’s you, Doll. You’re the weaker sex, the empty vessel."
"Can a weak empty vessel bear such a huge full hogshead? There’s a whole merchant’s venture of Bourdeaux stuff in ome, I’ll be friends with thee, Jack. Thou art going to the","Can a weak, empty vessel bear the burden of such a huge, full barrel? There’s a whole merchant’s stock of Bordeaux wine in him; you’ve never seen a ship with a fuller cargo hold. Come, Jack, I’ll be friends with"
"wars, and whether I shall ever see thee again or no, there is nobody cares.","you. You’re going off to war, and whether or not I ever see you again—well, who cares."
"Sir, Ancient Pistol’s below and would speak with","Sir, Ensign Pistol’s downstairs. He wants to talk with you."
"Hang him, swaggering rascal! Let him not come hither. It is the foul-mouthed’st rogue in England.","Let him drop dead, that hot-tempered jerk! Don’t let him in: he’s got the foulest mouth in England."
"If he swagger, let him not come here. No, by my faith, I must live among my neighbors. I’ll no swaggerers: I am in good comes no swaggerers here. I have not lived all this while to have swaggering now. Shut the door, I pray you.","If he’s going to make trouble, don’t let him in. No way; I have my neighbors to think about. I’ll have no troublemakers here. I’ve got my good reputation to watch out for. Shut the doors; no troublemakers are getting in here. I haven’t lived this long to have trouble now. Shut the doors, please."
"Dost thou hear, hostess?","Do you hear, hostess?"
"Pray you pacify yourself, Sir John. There comes no swaggerers","Please, be quiet a second, Sir John. No troublemakers are coming in here."
Dost thou hear? It is mine ancient.,Didn’t you hear? It’s my ensign.
"Tilly-vally, Sir John, ne'er tell me. And your ancient swaggerer comes not in my doors. I was before Master Tisick, the debuty t' other day, and, as he said to me—’twas “Neighbour Quickly,” says he—Master Dumb, our minister, was by then—“Neighbour Quickly,” says he, “receive those that are civil, for,” said he, “you are in an ill name.” Now he said so, I can tell whereupon. “For,” says he, “you are an what guests you receive. Receive,” says he, “no swaggering","Oh fiddlesticks, Sir John, I don’t want to hear it. Your Ensign Troublemaker is not coming in here. I talked to Master Tisick, the deputy, the other day. And he said to me—it couldn’t have been longer ago than last Wednesday—“I swear, neighbor Quickly,” he said. (Master Dumbe, the minister, was here at the time.) “Neighbor Quickly,” he said, “only let in people who are well behaved, because,” he said, “your reputation is suffering.” He said that, and I’ll tell you why. “You’re an honest woman, and people think highly of"
"companions.” There comes none here. You would bless you to hear what he said. No, I’ll no swaggerers.","you. So think about who you let in. Don’t let in,” he said, “any troublemakers.” And none are getting in. You’d be lucky if you heard what he said. No way, no troublemakers."
"He’s no swaggerer, hostess, a tame cheater, i' faith. You may swagger with a Barbary hen if her feathers turn back in any show of resistance.—Call him up, drawer.","He’s not a troublemaker, hostess. He’s a harmless cheater; you can pet him like a little puppy. He wouldn’t even start a fight with a guinea-hen, if her feathers stood up in annoyance. Get him up here, drawer."
"“Cheater,” call you him? I will bar no honest man my house, nor no cheater, but I do not love swaggering. By my troth, I shake; look you, I warrant you.","You call him a cheater Mistress Quickly misunderstands “cheater” as “escheator,” a type of royal treasury officer. cheater ? I won’t keep an honest man out of this bar, so I won’t keep a cheater out, either. But I don’t like troublemakers, I swear. I get sick when I hear the word, “troublemaker.” Feel, masters: I’m shaking. Look, I’m telling you."
"So you do, hostess.",You are shaking.
"Do I? Yea, in very truth, do I, an ’twere an aspen leaf. I cannot abide swaggerers.","I am?—I am! I swear, I’m shaking like a big tree leaf. I can’t stand troublemakers."
"God save you, Sir John.","Good to see you, Sir John!"
"Welcome, Ancient Pistol. Here, Pistol, I charge you with a cup of sack. Do you discharge upon mine hostess.","Welcome, Ensign Pistol. Here, Pistol Falstaff “charges”, or toasts Pistol, and asks him to toast Mistress Quickly in return. A pistol is also “charged,” or loaded, with bullets, and “discharged” when it is fired. Pistol . I charge you with a glass of wine. Now discharge on the hostess."
"I will discharge upon her, Sir John, with two bullets.","I’ll unload two big bullets bullets = testicles bullets on her, Sir John."
"She is pistol-proof. Sir, you shall not hardly offend her.","She’s Pistol-proof, sir. You’ll hardly be able to injure her."
"than will do me good, for no man’s pleasure, I.","I won’t have any proofs or any bullets. I won’t drink any more than I feel like, not for any man."
"Then to you, Mistress Dorothy! I will charge you.","Then here’s to you, Mistress. Dorothy, I’ll charge you."
"Charge me! I scorn you, scurvy companion. What, you poor, base, rascally, cheating lack-linen mate! Away, you mouldy","Charge me? Get lost, you sick jerk. What? You broke, rude, scheming, cheating, shirtless fool! Get away from me, you moldy bastard, away! I’m meant for your betters."
"I know you, Mistress Dorothy.","I know you, Mistress Dorothy."
"Away, you cutpurse rascal, you filthy bung, away! By this wine, I’ll thrust my knife in your mouldy chaps an you play the saucy cuttle with me. Away, you bottle-ale rascal, you God’s light, with two points on your shoulder? Much!","Get away, you pickpocket rascal! You dirty thief, away! I swear on this wine, I’ll stick a knife in your rotten cheeks if you keep abusing me like this. Out, you boozy rascal! You imposter of a solider! Since when are you a soldier, I ask you? With two armor tags on your shoulder? I’m sure!"
"God let me not live, but I will murder your ruff for this.","I’ll strangle your neck for that, or I’ll die trying."
"No more, Pistol. I would not have you go off here. Discharge yourself of our company, Pistol.","Hold it, Pistol. I don’t want you to go off here. Discharge someplace else, Pistol."
"No, good Captain Pistol, not here, sweet captain.","No, good Captain Pistol. Not here, sweet captain."
"Captain? Thou abominable damned cheater, art thou not ashamed to be called captain? An captains were of my mind, they would truncheon you out for taking their names upon you before you have earned them. You a captain? You slave,","Captain? You horrible, damned liar, aren’t you ashamed to be called “captain”? If captains shared my opinions, they’d beat you for taking their rank without earning it. You, a captain? You bastard, for what? For"
"He a captain! Hang him, rogue. He lives upon mouldy stewed prunes and dried cakes. A captain? God’s light, these villains will make the word as odious as the word “occupy,” which was an excellent good word before it was ill sorted.","tearing a poor whore’s clothes in a whorehouse? Him, a captain? Let him drop dead, the rogue! He lives off the moldy food you find in brothels. A captain? For God’s sake! Men like him will make the word “captain” as nasty as the word “occupy,” occupy = slang for “copulate” “occupy,” which was a fine word before it got corrupted. Captains had better watch out."
"Pray thee go down, good ancient.","Please, calm down, good ensign."
"Hark thee hither, Mistress Doll.","Listen here, Mistress Doll."
"Not I. I tell thee what, Corporal Bardolph, I could tear her. I’ll be revenged of her.","Not me. I’ll tell you what, Corporal Bardolph, I could tear her. I’ll get revenge on her."
Pray thee go down.,"Please, calm down!"
"I’ll see her damned first to Pluto’s damnèd lake, by this hand, to th' infernal deep with Erebus and tortures vile also. Hold hook and line, say I. Down, down, dogs! Down, Fates! Have we not Hiren here?","I’ll see her damned first. To the waters of hell, I swear, to the endless deep, with chaos and vile tortures. Hold onto that pole, I say. Down, down, dogs! Down, fates! Here’s my sword!"
"beseek you now, aggravate your choler.","Captain Pisser, be quiet! It’s late. I beg of you, stop being angry!"
"These be good humors indeed. Shall pack-horses And hollow pampered jades of Asia, which cannot go but thirty mile a day, Compare with Caesars and with cannibals, and Troyant Greeks? Nay, rather damn them with King Cerberus, and let the welkin roar. Shall we fall foul for toys?","Now we’re talking! Are we going to let old nags From here until he exits, Pistol’s language is strange and heightened. He continually makes garbled references to classical plays and poems that would have been familiar to Shakespeare’s audience. nags and pampered horses (who can’t manage more than a few miles a day) be compared with kings, and generals, and mythic heroes? No! Damn them to hell, and let the storms rage! Should we fight over nothing?"
"By my troth, captain, these are very bitter words.","My goodness, captain! Those are strong words!"
"Begone, good ancient. This will grow to a brawl anon.","You should go now, ensign. This is going to get out of control in a minute."
Die men like dogs! Give crowns like pins! Have we not Hiren here?,Let men die like dogs! Give away kings' crowns like they’re nothing! Isn’t this a sword we have here?
"O' my word, captain, there’s none such here. What the good- quiet.","My word of honor Mistress Quickly mishears the word “Hiren” as a woman’s name. word of honor , captain, there’s no such thing here! For goodness sake! Do you think I’d say she’s not if she were? For God’s sake, be quiet!"
"Then feed and be fat, my fair Calipolis. Come, give ’s some sack. Si fortune me tormente, sperato me contento. Fear we broadsides? No, let the fiend give fire. Give me some sack, we to full points here? And are etceteras nothing?","Then eat and grow fat, my sweet lady! Come, bring me some wine. Si fortuna me tormente “If fortune torments me, hope contents me.” Pistol’s motto is a garbled mix of French, Spanish, and Italian. fortuna me tormente , sperato me contento. Are we scared of an attack? No! Let the devil open fire. Give me some wine, and darling, lie there. (he lays his sword down) Is the party over? What about the rest of it, the et ceteras et ceteras = slang for “vaginas” et ceteras ?"
"Pistol, I would be quiet.","Pistol, I’d be quiet if I were you."
"Sweet knight, I kiss thy neaf. What, we have seen the seven stars.","Sweet knight, I kiss your fist. Look! It’s so late—we can see the Big Dipper out."
a fustian rascal.,"For God’s sake, throw him down the stairs. I can’t stand such a worthless jerk."
“Thrust him downstairs”? Know we not Galloway nags?,Throw him down the stairs? Don’t we know a common prostitute when we see one?
"Quoit him down, Bardolph, like a shove-groat shilling. Nay, an he do nothing but speak nothing, he shall be nothing here.","Toss him down, Bardolph, like a coin on a game board. He does nothing but talk a bunch of nothing, so he’s going to count for nothing here."
"Come, get you downstairs.",Come on. Get downstairs.
"What! shall we have incision? Shall we imbrue? (snatches 								up his sword) Then death rock me asleep, abridge my doleful days. Why then, let grievous, ghastly, gaping wounds untwine the Sisters Three. Come, Atropos, I say.","What? Is there going to be cutting In Greek and Roman mythol-ogy, the Three Fates spun threads representing the life of each human being; Atropos, the third sister, cut the thread when life was finished. cutting now? Shall we be soaked in blood? (he grabs his sword) Then let death sing me a lullaby; let him end my melancholy days! Let grievous, ghastly, gaping wounds unravel the thread of my life, spun by those three sisters of fate! Come, Atropos, cut off my thread!"
Here’s goodly stuff toward!,This ought to be good.
"Give me my rapier, boy.","Give me my sword, boy."
"I pray thee, Jack, I pray thee do not draw.","Please, Jack, please; don’t fight!"
Get you downstairs. (drawing and driving PISTO out),Get downstairs! (he draws his sword and chases PISTOL)
"Here’s a goodly tumult. I’ll forswear keeping house afore Alas, alas, put up your naked weapons, put up your naked weapons.","This is going to be some fight! I would sooner close this bar than put up with terrors and fits. It’s murder, I swear! Oh my! Oh my! Put away your naked weapons! Put away your naked weapons!"
"I pray thee, Jack, be quiet. The rascal’s gone. Ah, you whoreson little valiant villain, you.","Please, Jack, calm down; the jerk’s gone. Oh you son-of-a-bitch, brave little bastard, you!"
Are you not hurt i' the groin? Methought he made a shrewd thrust at your belly.,Did he hurt you in the groin? I thought he got in a good shot at your belly.
Have you turned him out o' doors?,Did you kick him out of here?
"Yea, sir. The rascal’s drunk. You have hurt him, sir, i' the shoulder.",Yup! The jerk’s drunk. You hurt his shoulder.
A rascal to brave me!,That jerk! How dare he challenge me!
"Ah, you sweet little rogue, you. Alas, poor ape, how thou whoreson chops. Ah, rogue, i' faith, I love thee. Thou art as valorous as Hector of Troy, worth five of Agamemnon, and ten times better than the Nine Worthies. Ah, villain!","Oh, you sweet little rogue, you! Oh my, you poor monkey, you’re sweating! Come, let me wipe your face. Come on, you fat bastard. Oh, you rogue! I swear, I love you. You’re as brave as Hector of Troy Hector of Troy and Agamemnon were great heroes of the Trojan War. Hector of Troy , you’re worth five Agamemnons, and you’re ten times better than the nine wonders of the world! Oh, you villain!"
"Ah, rascally slave! I will toss the rogue in a blanket.","The no-good jerk! I’ll wrap the rogue in a blanket, the way they punish cowards."
thee between a pair of sheets.,"Do it, if you dare. If you do, I’ll toss you between a pair of sheets!"
"The music is come, sir.","The music is here, sir."
"Let them play.—Play, sirs.—Sit on my knee, Doll. A rascal bragging slave! The rogue fled from me like quicksilver.","Let them play. Play, sirs. Sit on my knee, Doll. A no-good, bragging jerk! The fool ran from me like quicksilver."
"whoreson little tidy Bartholomew boar-pig, when wilt thou leave fighting a-days and foining a-nights and begin to patch up thine old body for heaven?","Truly, and you chased him like a church—slowly. You rotten little fat roasting pig! When will you stop fighting all day and thrusting all night, and start to get your body ready for its final resting place?"
"Peace, good Doll. Do not speak like a death’s-head; do not bid","Quiet, Doll. Don’t talk like a death’s-head death’s-head = a skull, used as a reminder of one’s mortality death’s-head . Don’t make me think of my own end."
"Sirrah, what humor’s the Prince of?","Sirrah, what’s the Prince Directors must decide if Doll sees Hal and Poins and sets Falstaff up, or if she doesn’t see them and happens to ask these questions innocently. Prince like?"
"A good shallow young fellow, he would have made a good pantler; he would a' chipped bread well.",He’s a shallow youngster. He would have made a good pantry servant: he would have been great at trimming the crusts off bread.
They say Poins has a good wit.,They say Poins is smart.
Tewksbury mustard. There’s no more conceit in him than is in a mallet.,"Him, smart? Hang him, he’s a baboon! He’s as thick as mustard, and no smarter than a sledgehammer."
Why does the Prince love him so then?,Then why does the Prince love him?
"Because their legs are both of a bigness, and he plays at candles' ends for flap-dragons, and rides the wild mare with the boys, and jumps upon joint stools, and swears with a good grace, and wears his boots very smooth, like unto the sign of the Leg, and breeds no bate with telling of discreet weak mind and an able body, for the which the Prince admits him; for the Prince himself is such another. The weight of a hair will turn the scales between their avoirdupois.","Because their legs are the same size, and he likes to play the game of quoits and eat fatty foods; and he’ll play drinking games, like dropping burning candle ends into his drinks. He plays on the see-saw with the boys, and pulls crazy stunts, and curses nicely. And his boots fit nice and smooth, just like the ones painted on the shoe store’s signs. And he doesn’t cause trouble by spilling secrets. He has all kinds of qualities associated with weak minds and healthy bodies, and that’s why the Prince keeps him around: because the Prince is exactly the same. There’s not a hair’s difference between the two of them."
(to POINS) Would not this nave of a wheel have his ears cut off?,(to POINS) We should cut this fatso’s ears off.
Let’s beat him before his whore.,Let’s beat him in front of his whore.
Look whe'er the withered elder hath not his poll clawed like a parrot.,"Look at that old geezer Possibly, Doll is playing with Falstaff’s hair. geezer having his head scratched like a parrot."
Is it not strange that desire should so many years outlive performance?,Isn’t it odd that desire lasts so much longer than the ability to perform?
"Kiss me, Doll.","Kiss me, Doll."
Saturn and Venus this year in conjunction! What says th' almanac to that?,"Saturn and Venus Saturn was the planet of old age, Venus the planet of love and desire. Saturn and Venus must be aligned this year! What do you think the astrological tables have to say about that?"
"And look whether the fiery trigon, his man, be not lisping to his master’s old tables, his notebook, his counsel keeper.","And look. That fiery-faced Bardolph is whispering sweet nothings to Quickly, his master’s old confidante."
(to DOLL) Thou dost give me flattering busses.,(to DOLL) You flatter me with your kisses.
"By my troth, I kiss thee with a most constant heart.","I swear, my kisses are heartfelt."
"I am old, I am old.",I’m old. I’m old.
I love thee better than I love e'er a scurvy young boy of them all.,I love you more than I could love any ridiculous young man in the world.
"Thursday; shalt have a cap tomorrow. A merry song! Come, it grows late. We’ll to bed. Thou 'lt forget me when I am gone.","What fabric do you want a new skirt made out of? I’ll get paid on Thursday, so you’ll get a new hat tomorrow. Let’s have a happy song. It’s getting late; let’s go to bed. You’ll forget me when I’m gone."
"By my troth, thou 'lt set me a-weeping an thou sayest so. harken a' th' end.","I swear, you’ll make me cry if you talk like that. I won’t wear any beautiful clothing till you return. Well, we’ll see what happens."
"Some sack, Francis.","Some wine, Francis."
"Anon, anon, sir.","Right away, sir!"
Ha? A bastard son of the King’s?—And art not thou,"What! A bastard son of the King? And aren’t you Poins, his brother?"
"Why, thou globe of sinful continents, what a life dost thou lead?","Your globe, covered with continents of sin! What kind of life are you leading?"
A better than thou. I am a gentleman. Thou art a drawer.,A better life than you. I’m a gentleman and you’re just a drawer.
"Very true, sir, and I come to draw you out by the ears.","That’s right, sir. And I’m going to draw you out of this room by the ears."
"to London. Now the Lord bless that sweet face of thine. O Jesu, are you come from Wales?","Oh, may God bless you, sir. I swear, welcome to London. God bless that sweet face of yours! Oh Jesus! Have you come from Wales?"
"Thou whoreson mad compound of majesty, (indicating DOLL) by this light flesh and corrupt blood, thou art welcome.","You son of a bitch, you insane block of royalty! (indicating DOLL) I swear on this piece of weak flesh and corrupt blood that you’re welcome here!"
"How? You fat fool, I scorn you.",What? You fat fool! The hell with you!
"My lord, he will drive you out of your revenge and turn all to a merriment, if you take not the heat.","My lord, if you don’t strike while the iron’s hot, he’ll turn everything into a joke and rob you of your chance for revenge."
"You whoreson candle-mine, you how vilely did you speak of me even now before this honest, virtuous, civil","You son of a whore, you giant piece of candle wax, you said such horrible things about me just now, in front of this honest, upstanding and well-behaved lady."
"God’s blessing of your good heart, and so she is, by my troth.","May God bless your good heart! She is all that, I swear."
Didst thou hear me?,Did you hear me?
"Yea, and you knew me, as you did when you ran away by Gad’s Hill. You knew I was at your back, and spoke it on","Yes. And you knew I was there, right? It’s just like when you ran away at Gad’s Hill The incident at Gad’s Hill occurs in Act Two of Henry IV, Part One. Gad’s Hill : you knew I was the one who beat you, and you made up some story just to irritate me."
"No, no, no; not so. I did not think thou wast within hearing.","No, no, no. Not at all. I had no idea you were there."
"I shall drive you, then, to confess the wilfull abuse, and then I know how to handle you.",Then I’m going to make you confess that you deliberately slandered me. And then I’ll know what to do next.
"No abuse, Hal, o' mine honor, no abuse.","No slander, Hal. On my honor, no slander."
and I know not what?,"No? To malign me, and call me a pantry servant and a bread-trimmer, and I don’t know what else?"
"No abuse, Hal.","No slander, Hal."
No abuse?,No slander?
"No abuse, Ned, i' th' world, honest Ned, none. I dispraised with thee; in which doing, I have done the part of a careful friend and a true subject, and thy father is to give me thanks for it. No abuse, Hal.—None, Ned, none. No, faith, boys, none.","No slander, Ned, in the world, honest Ned, none. I maligned him only to the wicked, so that the wicked wouldn’t fall in love with him. And by doing that, I’ve acted like a good friend and loyal subject, and your father should thank me for it. No slander, Hal, none, Ned. No, truly boys, none."
"See now whether pure fear and entire cowardice doth not us. Is she of the wicked, is thine hostess here of the wicked, or is thy boy of the wicked, or honest Bardolph, whose zeal burns in his nose, of the wicked?","Now your absolute fear and utter cowardliness has made you wrong this good lady in order to make peace with us. Is she wicked? Is this hostess here wicked? Is your boy here wicked? Or honest Bardolph, whose piety burns in his face? Is he wicked?"
"Answer, thou dead elm, answer.","Answer, you withered old trunk, answer."
"his face is Lucifer’s privy kitchen, where he doth nothing but roast malt-worms. For the boy, there is a good angel about him, but the devil outbids him too.","The devil has marked Bardolph as long gone, and his face is Lucifer’s kitchen, where only drunks are served. As for the boy, he may have a good spirit on one shoulder, but the devil on the other is stronger."
For the women?,And the women?
"For the other, I owe her money, and whether she be damned for that I know not.","One of them is in hell already, where she gets poor souls hot. As for the other, I owe her money. If she’s damned for that, I have no idea."
"No, I warrant you.","I’m not, I promise you that."
"No, I think thou art not; I think thou art quit for that. Marry, be eaten in thy house contrary to the law, for the which I think thou wilt howl.","No, I think you’re not. I think you’ve been excused for that. But there’s another charge against you. You serve flesh in this place, and that’s against the law. You’re going to hell for that."
All vitlars do so. What’s a joint of mutton or two in a whole Lent?,Everybody who serves food does that. What’s wrong with a bite or two of meat during Lent?
"You, gentlewoman.","You, good lady—"
What says your Grace?,"What is it, gracious sir?"
His grace says that which his flesh rebels against.,"He may speak to you graciously, but his body feels otherwise."
"Who knocks so loud at door? Look to th' door there, Francis.","Who’s knocking so loudly on the door? Francis, go see."
"Peto, how now, what news?","Peto, how are you? What’s going on?"
"And there are twenty weak and wearied posts Come from the north, and as I came along I met and overtook a dozen captains, Bareheaded, sweating, knocking at the taverns","Your father the King is in Westminster. Twenty exhausted messengers have arrived from the north. And, on my way here, I met a dozen captains, hustling and working hard, knocking on the door of every tavern and searching for Sir John Falstaff."
"By heaven, Poins, I feel me much to blame So idly to profane the precious time When tempest of commotion, like the south Borne with black vapour, doth begin to melt Give me my sword and cloak.—Falstaff, good night.","My God, Poins, I feel terrible wasting precious time on this idleness when a huge black storm is brewing, soon to open up on our bare, vulnerable heads. Give me my coat and my sword. Good night, Falstaff."
"Now comes in the sweetest morsel of the night, and we must hence and leave it unpicked.","Now’s the sweetest part of the night, and we have to leave without enjoying it."
More knocking at the door?,More knocking!
"How now, what’s the matter?",What’s going on? What’s the matter?
A dozen captains stay at door for you.,"You have to go to the royal court immediately, sir. A dozen captains are at the door waiting for you."
"(to the PAGE) Pay the musicians, sirrah.—Farewell, hostess.—Farewell, Doll. You see, my good wenches, how men of merit are sought after. The undeserver may sleep wenches. If I be not sent away post, I will see you again ere I go.","(to the PAGE) Pay the musicians, Sirrah. Goodbye, waitress. Goodbye, Doll. See, wenches, how wanted we valuable men are? The good-for-nothing may sleep when the man of action is needed. Farewell, good wenches. If I’m not sent away immediately, I’ll come see you again before I go."
"I cannot speak. If my heart be not ready to burst—well, sweet Jack, have a care of thyself.","I can’t speak; my heart is ready to burst. Well, sweet Jack, take care of yourself."
"Farewell, farewell.","Farewell, farewell."
"Well, fare thee well. I have known thee these twenty-nine years, come peascod time, but an honester and truer-hearted man—well, fare thee well.","Well, goodbye. I’ve known you twenty-nine years this June. But a more honest, more good-hearted man—well, fare you well."
(within) Mistress Tearsheet!,(offstage) Mistress Tearsheet!
What’s the matter?,What’s the matter?
(within) Bid Mistress Tearsheet come to my master.,"(offstage) Mistress Tearsheet, come to my master."
"O, run, Doll, run, run, good Doll. Come.—She comes blubbered.—Yea! Will you come, Doll?","O, run, Doll, run; run, good Doll. Come.—She’s coming, all crying and blubbering.—Will you come, Doll?"
"Go call the Earls of Surrey and of Warwick; But, ere they come, bid them o'erread these letters And well consider of them. Make good speed.","Call the earls of Surrey and Warwick. Tell them to read over these letters before they come, and to think carefully about them. Hurry."
"How many thousand of my poorest subjects Nature’s soft nurse, how have I frighted thee, That thou no more wilt weigh my eyelids down And steep my senses in forgetfulness? Why rather, sleep, liest thou in smoky cribs, And hushed with buzzing night-flies to thy slumber, Than in the perfumed chambers of the great, Under the canopies of costly state, And lull’d with sound of sweetest melody? In loathsome beds and leavest the kingly couch A watch-case or a common 'larum bell? Wilt thou upon the high and giddy mast Seal up the shipboy’s eyes, and rock his brains And in the visitation of the winds, Who take the ruffian billows by the top, Curling their monstrous heads and hanging them With deafening clamor in the slippery clouds Canst thou, O partial sleep, give thy repose To the wet sea-boy in an hour so rude,","Thousands of even my poorest subjects are sleeping right now. Oh sleep! Oh sweet sleep, nature’s gentle healer, what have I done to frighten you? You won’t weigh down my eyelids anymore, or dull my mind to make me forget. Sleep, why do you lie in filthy hovels, stretched out on uncomfortable cots, where insects' buzzing is the lullaby? Why don’t you lie in the sweet-smelling bedrooms of kings, under opulent canopies, lulled with soft and beautiful music? You drowsy god, why do you lie with the common people in their loathsome beds, leaving the royal bed lonely like a sentry post, or a bell tower? Will you even close the eyes of a ship boy, high up on the whirling mast, and rock him gently in a cradle made of rough, tossing seas and howling winds—winds which take the waves and, curling them over, crashes them through the air with such a deafening noise that they wake death itself? Can you, oh unfair sleep, give rest to a drenched little sailor in the midst of such roughness, and yet deny it to a king?"
"And, in the calmest and most stillest night, With all appliances and means to boot, Uneasy lies the head that wears a crown.","A king on the calmest, stillest night, with everything available for sleep? Then, you happy commoners, put yourselves to bed. The head that wears the crown sleeps uneasily."
Many good morrows to your Majesty.,"Good morning, your highness."
"Is it good morrow, lords?","Is it morning, lords?"
"'Tis one o'clock, and past.",It’s after one o'clock.
Have you read o'er the letter that I sent you?,"Well, then, good morning to you all, my lords. Have you read the letters I sent you?"
"We have, my liege.","We have, your highness."
"Then you perceive the body of our kingdom How foul it is, what rank diseases grow","Then you can tell how sick the kingdom is. There are serious diseases spreading through its body, very near its heart."
"It is but as a body yet distempered, Which to his former strength may be restored With good advice and little medicine. My Lord Northumberland will soon be cooled.",The body’s only out of sorts. It can be brought back to full health through good care and some medicine. Northumberland will soon be suppressed.
"And see the revolution of the times Make mountains level, and the continent, Weary of solid firmness, melt itself Into the sea, and other times to see Too wide for Neptune’s hips; how chance’s mocks And changes fill the cup of alteration","Oh God! If only we could read the book of destiny! We’d see how time changes everything, bringing mountains low and melting the land—which is tired of being solid and firm—into the sea. We’d see how the beach is sometimes too wide for even the tide to conquer. We’d see how blind luck can make mockeries of men, and how change can affect you in countless ways."
"With divers liquors! O, if this were seen, The happiest youth, viewing his progress through, Would shut the book, and sit him down and die. 'Tis not ten years gone Since Richard and Northumberland, great friends, Did feast together, and in two years after This Percy was the man nearest my soul, Who like a brother toiled in my affairs And laid his love and life under my foot, Yea, for my sake, even to the eyes of Richard (to WARWICK) You, cousin Nevil, as I may remember— When Richard, with his eye brimful of tears, Then checked and rated by Northumberland, Did speak these words, now proved a prophecy? My cousin Bolingbroke ascends my throne”— Though then, God knows, I had no such intent, But that necessity so bowed the state That I and greatness were compelled to kiss— “The time will come that foul sin, gathering head, Shall break into corruption”—so went on, Foretelling this same time’s condition And the division of our amity.","If even the happiest youth could read this book, he’d look at the course of his life—the dangers he’s endured, the challenges that still lie ahead—and he’d shut that book, sit down and die. It was less than ten years ago that Richard and Northumberland loved each other. Then two years later, they were at war. Just eight years ago, Northumberland was the man closest to my heart. Like a brother, he devoted himself to me, dedicating both life and limb to my cause. He even challenged Richard on my behalf. But which of you was there— I think it was you, Warwick—when Richard, his eyes brimming with tears because of Northumberland’s rebellion, spoke these words that now seem prophetic: “Northumberland, you are the ladder that Bolingbroke has climbed to get to the throne.” Although, God knows, it wasn’t my intention then to become king. But the country needed it so badly, I was forced to rise up and become great. “The time will come,” Richard continued, “when this terrible sin, growing in size, will break out into corruption.” That’s how he went on. He predicted our current condition, and the collapse of our alliances."
"Figuring the nature of the times deceased, The which observed, a man may prophesy, With a near aim, of the main chance of things As yet not come to life, which in their seeds Such things become the hatch and brood of time, And by the necessary form of this,","There is a chronicle for every man’s life, which shows what happened to him in times now past. If you study that chronicle, you can prophecy what lies ahead with some accuracy. The seeds of things to come are buried in the things that have already happened. These seeds grow, and become the children of time."
"King Richard might create a perfect guess That great Northumberland, then false to him, Which should not find a ground to root upon Unless on you.","King Richard could look at the pattern of what had gone before and predict perfectly that Northumberland’s betrayal—then still a seed—would someday grow larger, if it could find suitable soil to root in. And you’re the only soil it could have found."
Are these things then necessities? Then let us meet them like necessities. They say the Bishop and Northumberland Are fifty thousand strong.,"Were these things necessary, then? Then we’ll treat them like necessities, even though the very word “necessities” cries out against us. They say the Archbishop and Northumberland have fifty thousand men in their army."
"It cannot be, my lord. Rumor doth double, like the voice and echo, To go to bed. Upon my soul, my lord, The powers that you already have sent forth Shall bring this prize in very easily. To comfort you the more, I have received Your Majesty hath been this fortnight ill, And these unseasoned hours perforce must add Unto your sickness.","That can’t be, my lord. Rumor, like an echo, doubles the size of our enemy’s army. Please, your highness, go to bed. I swear on my soul that the army you’ve already sent out can win this battle easily. And here’s more good news: I’ve heard for sure that Glendower is dead. You’ve been ill for two weeks now, your majesty. Keeping such irregular hours will surely make things worse."
"I will take your counsel. And were these inward wars once out of hand,","I’ll listen to your advice. And once we’ve got this civil war in hand, we will, my friends, march to the Holy Land."
"Come on, come on, come on. Give me your hand, sir, give me your hand, sir. An early stirrer, by the rood. And how doth my good cousin Silence?","Come on, come on, come on, sir. Shake my hand, sir, shake my hand. You’re an early riser, I swear. How are you, cousin Silence?"
"Good morrow, good cousin Shallow.","Good morning, cousin Shallow."
"daughter and mine, my goddaughter Ellen?","And how’s my cousin, your wife? And your prettiest daughter, my fair god-daughter Ellen?"
"Alas, a black ousel, cousin Shallow.","I’m afraid she’s got dark hair Dark hair was considered unattractive. dark hair , cousin Shallow!"
"By yea and no, sir. I dare say my cousin William is become a good scholar. He is at Oxford still, is he not?","By gum, I bet William’s become a real scholar. He’s still at Oxford, right?"
"Indeed, sir, to my cost.","He sure is, and I’m the one who’s paying for it."
"He must then to the Inns o' Court shortly. I was once of Clement’s Inn, where I think they will talk of mad Shallow yet.","He’ll be going to law school soon. I studied law at Clement’s Inn The Inns of Court are London legal colleges. Clement’s Inn , where I think they still talk about crazy old Shallow."
"You were called “Lusty Shallow” then, cousin.","You were known as lusty Shallow back then, cousin."
"anything indeed too, and roundly too. There was I, and little John Doit of Staffordshire, and black George Barnes, and Francis Pickbone, and Will Squele, a Cotswold man. You had not four such swinge-bucklers in all the Inns o' Court","I was known as anything, I swear. And I would have done anything too, and all the way, too. I was there, and little John Doit from Staffordshire, and black-haired George Barnes, and Francis Pickbone, and Will Squele, from the Cotswolds. Since then, no law college"
"were and had the best of them all at commandment. Then was Jack Falstaff, now Sir John, a boy, and page to Thomas Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk.","in the world has seen four swashbucklers like us. And let me tell you this: we knew where to find the highest-quality whores, and the best of them were at our beck and call. At that time, Jack Falstaff, now Sir John, was just a boy. He worked as a page for Thomas Mowbray, the Duke of Norfolk."
"This Sir John, cousin, that comes hither anon about soldiers?",Do you mean the same Sir John that’s coming here soon to recruit soldiers?
"head at the court gate, when he was a crack not thus high; and the very same day did I fight with one Sampson Stockfish, a fruiterer, behind Grey’s Inn. Jesu, Jesu, the mad days that I have spent! And to see how many of my old acquaintance","The same Sir John, the very same. I saw him beat Skogan upon the head when he was a little tyke, not this high. The same day, I had a fight with a guy named Sampson Stockfish. He sold fruit behind Gray’s Inn. Jesus, Jesus! I’ve had some crazy times! To think that so many of my old pals are dead!"
"We shall all follow, cousin.","We’ll all follow them, cousin."
"Certain, ’tis certain; very sure, very sure. Death, as the Psalmist saith, is certain to all. All shall die. How a good yoke of bullocks at Stamford Fair?","Right you are, very right. That’s for sure, that’s for sure. Death, as the Psalms say, is certain. Everyone dies. How much are they getting for good young bulls at the Stamford county fair?"
"By my troth, cousin, I was not there.","Truly, I wasn’t there."
Death is certain. Is old Dooble of your town living yet?,Death is certain. Is old Double from your hometown still alive?
"Dead, sir.","Dead, sir."
"Jesu, Jesu, dead! He drew a good bow, and dead? He shot a fine shoot. John o' Gaunt loved him well, and betted much clout at twelve score, and carried you a forehand shaft a fourteen and fourteen and a half, that it would have done a man’s heart good to see. How a score of ewes now?","Jesus, Jesus, dead! He was a good archer, and dead! He could fire one heck of a shot. John of Gaunt loved him, and used to wager on his shooting. Dead! He could hit a target from two hundred and forty yards, and he could shoot a straight arrow two hundred and eighty yards—maybe even two hundred and ninety. That was something to see. How much are they getting for twenty ewes?"
"Thereafter as they be, a score of good ewes may be worth ten",Depends on the quality. Twenty good ewes could be worth ten pounds.
And is old Dooble dead?,And old Double’s dead?
"Here come two of Sir John Falstaff’s men, as I think.","Here come two of Sir John Falstaff’s men, I think."
"Good morrow, honest gentlemen.","Good morning, gentlemen."
"I beseech you, which is Justice Shallow?","If you don’t mind, which of you is Judge Shallow?"
one of the King’s justices of the peace. What is your good pleasure with me?,"I’m Robert Shallow, sir, a poor landowner in this county, and one of the King’s justices of the peace. How can I help you?"
"My captain, sir, commends him to you, my captain, Sir John Falstaff, a tall gentleman, by heaven, and a most gallant","My captain sends his regards. My captain, Sir John Falstaff. He’s a valiant gentleman, I swear, and a brave leader."
"He greets me well, sir. I knew him a good backsword man. How doth the good knight? May I ask how my lady his wife doth?","It’s great to hear from him. I knew him to be a good fencer. How’s the good knight doing? And, if you don’t mind my asking, how’s his wife?"
"Sir, pardon. A soldier is better accommodated than with a","I beg your pardon, sir. A soldier has no need for a wife; he is well enough accommodated."
"It is well said, in faith, sir, and it is well said indeed too. “Better accommodated.” It is good, yea, indeed, is it. Good phrases are surely, and ever were, very commendable.","Well said, I swear, sir. Well said. “Well enough accommodated!” That’s good. That’s very good. Good turns"
"“Accommodated.” It comes of accommodo. Very good, a good phrase.","of phrase deserve to be praised. “Accommodated!” It comes from the Latin, “accommodo.” Very good. That’s a good turn of phrase."
"this day, I know not the phrase, but I will maintain the word with my sword to be a soldierlike word, and a word of exceeding good command, by heaven. “Accommodated,” that is when a man is, as they say, accommodated, or when accommodated, which is an excellent thing.","Excuse me, sir. I’ve heard the word. You call it a turn of phrase? I don’t know anything about phrases, but I’ll fight for the word. It’s a good, soldier-like word; a word with many uses, to be sure. “Accommodated.” You can say that a man is accommodated when he has been furnished with supplies. And you can also say that a man is being accommodated when he’s, you know, being accommodated Bardolph here gives “being accommodated” a sexual connotation. being accommodated . Which is an excellent thing."
"It is very just. Look, here comes good Sir John.—Give me your good hand, give me your Worship’s good hand. By my troth, you like well and bear your years very well. Welcome,","It certainly is. Look, here comes good Sir John. Let me shake your hand; let me shake your hand, sir. I swear, you look good, like you haven’t aged a day. Welcome, good Sir John."
"I am glad to see you well, good Master Robert Shallow.— Master Sure-card, as I think?","I’m glad to see you’re well, Master Robert Shallow. And this is Master Surecard, isn’t it?"
"No, Sir John. It is my cousin Silence, in commission with me.","No, Sir John. It’s my cousin Silence. Like me, he’s also a justice of the peace."
"Good Master Silence, it well befits you should be of the",Master Silence. Your name suits a justice of “the peace.”
Your good Worship is welcome.,"Welcome, sir."
"Fie, this is hot weather, gentlemen. Have you provided me here half a dozen sufficient men?","Damn! It’s hot out, gentlemen. Have you found half a dozen able-bodied men for me?"
"Marry, have we, sir. Will you sit?","Yes sir, we have. Won’t you sit?"
"Let me see them, I beseech you.","Let me see them, please."
"Where’s the roll? Where’s the roll? Where’s the roll? Let me see, let me see, let me see. So, so, so, so, so. So, so. Yea, marry, sir.—Rafe Mouldy!—Let them appear as I call, let them do so, let them do so. Let me see, where is Mouldy?","Where’s the list? Where’s the list? Where’s the list? Let’s see, let’s see, let’s see. Right, right. Yes, sir: Ralph Mouldy! Let them come when I call. Let them do that, let them do that. Let’s see. Where’s Mouldy?"
"Here, an it please you.","Here, sir."
"What think you, Sir John? A good-limbed fellow; young, strong, and of good friends.","What do you think, Sir John? He’s got good muscles. Young, strong, and well-connected."
Is thy name Mouldy?,Are you Mouldy?
"Yea, an ’t please you.","Yes, sir."
'Tis the more time thou wert used.,"Well then, it’s about time you were put to use."
"Ha, ha, ha, most excellent, i' faith! Things that are mouldy lack use. Very singular good, in faith. Well said, Sir John, very well said.","Ha, ha, ha! Excellent, I swear! Things that don’t get used enough do indeed become moldy. Good one, I swear. Well said, Sir John, very well said."
Prick him.,"Prick i.e., mark his name on the list Prick him."
alone. My old dame will be undone now for one to do her husbandry and her drudgery. You need not to have pricked me. There are other men fitter to go out than I.,"I’ve already been pricked pricked = annoyed; “prick” is also slang for “penis”; Mouldy puns that he has already been supplied with one. pricked well enough, thanks. You could have left me alone. My old lady’s in trouble now: she won’t have anyone to do her husbandry or her housework. You didn’t have to prick me; there are abler men husbandry = farm work; a husband’s sexual duties abler men than me."
"Go to. Peace, Mouldy. You shall go. Mouldy, it is time you were","That’s enough; quiet, Mouldy. You’re going. Mouldy, it’s time you were put to use."
Spent?,Put to use?
"Peace, fellow, peace. Stand aside. Know you where you are?—For th' other, Sir John. Let me see.—Simon Shadow!","Quiet, man, quiet. Step aside. Don’t you know where you are? Now the next, Sir John. Let’s see. Simon Shadow!"
"Yea, marry, let me have him to sit under. He’s like to be a",Now you’re talking. I’d like to sit under him. He’ll be a cool soldier.
Where’s Shadow?,Where’s Shadow?
"Here, sir.","Here, sir."
"Shadow, whose son art thou?","Shadow, whose son are you?"
"My mother’s son, sir.","My mother’s son, sir."
"the son of the female is the shadow of the male. It is often so, indeed, but much of the father’s substance.","Your mother’s son? Probably, and you got your father’s name. The woman’s son is a portrait of the father; yes, that’s usually the case, though the son is little more than a dim copy, without any of the father’s true substance."
"Do you like him, Sir John?","Do you like him, Sir John?"
"Shadow will serve for summer. Prick him, for we have a","Shadow shadows = fake names of nonexistent people Shadow will be useful in the summer. Prick him, too. We’ll need him, for there are a lot of shadows filling up this roster."
Thomas Wart!,Thomas Wart!
Where’s he?,Where’s he?
"Here, sir.","Here, sir."
Is thy name Wart?,Is your name Wart?
"Yea, sir.",Yup.
Thou art a very ragged wart.,You’re a pretty ragged wart.
"Shall I prick him down, Sir John?","Should I prick him on the list, Sir John?"
"It were superfluous, for his apparel is built upon his back, and the whole frame stands upon pins. Prick him no more.","Not necessary. For look: his clothing is just a bunch of pieces sewn together, and his whole body rests on legs as skinny as pins. He’s been pricked enough by pins and needles—don’t prick him anymore."
well.—Francis Feeble!,"Ha, ha, ha! You are funny, sir. You are funny. I’ve got to hand it to you. Francis Feeble!"
"Here, sir.","Here, sir."
"What trade art thou, Feeble?","What kind of work do you do, Feeble?"
"A woman’s tailor, sir.","I’m a woman’s tailor, sir."
"Shall I prick him, sir?","Should I prick him, sir?"
"You may, but if he had been a man’s tailor, he’d ha' pricked you.—Wilt thou make as many holes in an enemy’s battle as thou hast done in a woman’s petticoat?","You might as well. But if he had been a man’s tailor, he would have already pricked you with his pins. Will you make as many holes in the enemy’s armor as you have in women’s underwear?"
"I will do my good will, sir. You can have no more.","I’ll do my best, sir. I can’t do any more."
"Feeble. Thou wilt be as valiant as the wrathful dove or most magnanimous mouse.—Prick the woman’s tailor well, Master Shallow, deep, Master Shallow.","Well said, good woman’s tailor! Well said, courageous Feeble! You’ll be as brave as the angriest dove or the most valiant mouse. Prick the woman’s tailor. A big one, Master Shallow; a deep one, Master Shallow."
"I would Wart might have gone, sir.","I wish Wart were going, sir."
"and make him fit to go. I cannot put him to a private soldier that is the leader of so many thousands. Let that suffice, most forcible Feeble.","And I wish you were a man’s tailor. You could have mended his clothes and made him fit to go. I can’t make him a private soldier when he’s already the leader of thousands—of lice, that is. But never mind, oh forcible Feeble."
"It shall suffice, sir.","Never mind, sir."
"I am bound to thee, reverend Feeble.—Who is next?","I like you, good Feeble. Who’s next?"
Peter Bullcalf o' th' green.,Peter Bullcalf from the village green!
"Yea, marry, let’s see Bullcalf.",Oh yeah. Let’s see Bullcalf.
"Here, sir.","Here, sir!"
"Fore God, a likely fellow. Come, prick me Bullcalf till he",My God! What a great man! Prick Bullcalf until he shouts again.
"O Lord, good my lord captain—","Oh Lord! My lord, good Captain—"
"What, dost thou roar before thou art pricked?","What, you’re yelling before you’ve even been pricked?"
"O Lord, sir, I am a diseased man.","Oh Lord, sir! I’m a sick man."
What disease hast thou?,What disease do you have?
"ringing in the King’s affairs upon his coronation day, sir.","A nasty cold, sir. A cough, sir. I caught it when I was ringing the church bells in honor of the King’s coro-nation."
"Come, thou shalt go to the wars in a gown. We will have away thy cold, and I will take such order that my friends shall ring for thee.— (to SHALLOW) Is here all?","Then you’ll go to war in a dressing gown. We’ll get rid of your cold, and I’ll give orders for some of my men to ring the bells for you while you’re away. (to SHALLOW) Is this everybody?"
"but four here, sir, and so I pray you go in with me to dinner.","We’ve got two more here than you need. You can have four, sir. Now, come inside and eat lunch with me."
"Come, I will go drink with you, but I cannot tarry dinner. I am glad to see you, by my troth, Master Shallow.","I’ll have a drink with you, but I can’t stay to eat. But I’m truly glad to see you, Master Shallow."
"O, Sir John, do you remember since we lay all night in the","Oh, Sir John, do you remember the time we spent all night in the windmill in St. George’s field?"
"No more of that, good Master Shallow, no more of that.","Don’t go there, Master Shallow. Don’t go there."
"Ha, ’twas a merry night. And is Jane Nightwork alive?",Ha! That was a fun night. Is Jane Nightwork still alive?
"She lives, Master Shallow.","She’s alive, Master Shallow."
She never could away with me.,She never could stand me.
Master Shallow.,"Never, never. She always said she couldn’t stand Master Shallow."
"By the Mass, I could anger her to th' heart. She was then a bona roba. Doth she hold her own well?","Truly, I could anger her to the core. She was a good-looking wench then. Does she still look good?"
"Old, old, Master Shallow.","Old, old, Master Shallow."
"she’s old, and had Robin Nightwork by old Nightwork before I came to Clement’s Inn.","Well, she must be old. She’s got no choice but to be old. Of course she’s old. She gave birth to Robin Nightwork, the son of old man Nightwork, before I even got to Clement’s Inn."
That’s fifty-five year ago.,That’s fifty-five years ago.
"Ha, cousin Silence, that thou hadst seen that that this knight","Ha, cousin Silence, if only you’d seen what this knight and I have seen! Ha! Am I right, Sir John?"
"We have heard the chimes at midnight, Master Shallow.","We’ve seen the clock strike midnight, Master Shallow."
"That we have, that we have, that we have. In faith, Sir John, we have. Our watchword was “Hem, boys.” Come, let’s to dinner; come, let’s to dinner. Jesus, the days that we have","We sure have, we sure have, we sure have. I swear, Sir John, we sure have. Our slogan was “Down the hatch, boys!” Come, let’s have lunch, let’s have lunch. Jesus, the things we’ve seen! Come, come."
"Good Master Corporate Bardolph, stand my friend, and here’s four Harry ten-shillings in French crowns for you. In very truth, sir, I had as lief be hanged, sir, as go. And yet, for mine own part, sir, I do not care, but rather because I am my friends. Else, sir, I did not care, for mine own part, so much.","Good Master Corporate Bullcalf’s mistake for “corporal” Corporate Bardolph, be my friend. Here are some French crowns for you, worth four Harry ten shillings A “Harry ten shilling” was a ten-shilling coin minted during the reign of Henry VII; by Shakespeare’s time, they were each worth about five shillings. Harry ten shillings . I’m telling you, sir, I’d just as soon be hanged as go fight. It’s not that I care about my well-being. It’s just that I’m not willing to go, and furthermore, I’d like to stay here with my friends. But really, I don’t care about myself."
Go to. Stand aside.,Whatever. Stand over there.
"And, good Master Corporal Captain, for my old dame’s sake, stand my friend. She has nobody to do anything about You shall have forty, sir.","And, good Master Corporal Captain, for my old lady’s sake, be my friend. She has nobody here to help her do anything once I’m gone. She’s old and can’t do much by herself. I’ll give you forty shillings, sir."
Go to. Stand aside.,Whatever. Stand over there.
"By my troth, I care not. A man can die but once. We owe God a death. I’ll ne'er bear a base mind. An ’t be my destiny, so; it go which way it will, he that dies this year is quit for the next.","I’ll tell you the truth: I don’t care one way or the other. You only die once, and we all owe God a death. I won’t do anything underhanded. If it’s my fate, it’s my fate. If not, not. No man is too good to serve his country. Whatever happens, happens. If you die this year, you’re paid up for next year."
Well said. Th' art a good fellow.,Well said. You’re a good man.
"Faith, I’ll bear no base mind.",I’m telling you. I won’t do anything underhanded.
"Come, sir, which men shall I have?","All right, sir. Which men can I have?"
Four of which you please.,Any four you choose.
"Sir, a word with you. (aside to FALSTAFF) I have three pound to free Mouldy and Bullcalf.","Sir, may I have a word with you? (whispers to FALSTAFF) I’ve gotten three pounds to free Mouldy and Bullcalf."
"Go to, well.",No kidding. Great.
"Come, Sir John, which four will you have?","Come on, Sir John, which four do you want?"
Do you choose for me.,You pick.
"Marry, then, Mouldy, Bullcalf, Feeble, and Shadow.","All right, then. Mouldy, Bullcalf, Feeble, and Shadow."
"Mouldy and Bullcalf! For you, Mouldy, stay at home till you are past service.—And for your part, Bullcalf, grow till you","Mouldy and Bullcalf. Mouldy, you stay home till you’re too old to fight. And as for you, Bullcalf, wait till you’ve reached fighting age. I don’t want either of you."
"Sir John, Sir John, do not yourself wrong. They are your likeliest men, and I would have you served with the best.","Sir John, Sir John. Don’t make a mistake. They’re the best men of the bunch, and I want you to have only the best."
"Will you tell me, Master Shallow, how to choose a man? Care I for the limb, the thews, the stature, bulk, and big Here’s Wart. You see what a ragged appearance it is. He shall","Master Shallow, are you going to tell me how to choose a soldier? Do you think I care about a man’s body,"
"charge you and discharge you with the motion of a pewterer’s hammer, come off and on swifter than he that gibbets on the brewer’s bucket. And this same half-faced the enemy. The foeman may with as great aim level at the edge of a penknife. And for a retreat, how swiftly will this Feeble the woman’s tailor, run off! O, give me the spare men, and spare me the great ones.—Put me a caliver into","strength, height, bulk, and overall size? Give me his spirit, Master Shallow! Take a look at Wart. You see how ragged he looks? He can load and fire steadily—as steadily as a tinsmith’s hammer. He can advance and regroup fast—faster than a brewer’s delivery pail can be refilled. And this skinny guy, Shadow—give me this man. He offers no target to the enemy. The enemy might as well try aiming at a knife’s edge. And as for retreating, Feeble, the woman’s tailor, will run faster than you can imagine. Oh, give me the spare men and spare me the great ones! Bardolph, give Wart a musket."
"Hold, Wart. Traverse. Thas, thas, thas.","Here you go, Wart. Present arms! Right shoulder, arms! Left shoulder, arms!"
"Come, manage me your caliver: so, very well, go to, very good, exceeding good. O, give me always a little, lean, old, chopped, bald shot. Well said, i' faith, Wart. Th' art a good","Come on, handle your weapon. Yes, good. Very good. Very, very good. Oh, give me a little, skinny, old, dried-out, bald rifleman any day. Good job, Wart. You’re a good scab of a guy. Wait, here’s a tester tester = sixpence tester for you."
"He is not his craft’s master. He doth not do it right. I remember at Mile End Green, when I lay at Clement’s Inn— I was then Sir Dagonet in Arthur’s show—there was a little quiver fellow, and he would manage you his piece thus. And in. “Rah, tah, tah,” would he say. “Bounce,” would he say, and away again would he go, and again would he come. I shall ne'er see such a fellow.","He’s no expert. He’s not doing it right. I remember up at Mile-End Park, when I was at Clement’s Inn—I played the fool in the archery pageant. There was a nimble little guy, and he would handle his weapon like this, and he would run all over the place, and he’d charge and charge. “Rat-a-tat tat,” he’d say. “Bang!” he’d say. Then he’d run away, then come back. I never saw anybody like him."
"These fellows will do well, Master Shallow.—God keep Fare you well, gentlemen both. I thank you. I must a dozen mile to-night.—Bardolph, give the soldiers coats.","These guys will be fine, Master Shallow. God bless you, Master Silence—I won’t say much to you. Farewell, gentlemen, and thank you. I have to march twelve miles tonight. Bardolph, give the soldiers uniforms."
"Sir John, the Lord bless you. God prosper your affairs. God send us peace. At your return, visit our house. Let our old","God bless you, Sir John. May God bring you good luck, and bring us peace. When you come back, pay us"
the court.,a visit. Let’s renew our old friendship. Maybe I’ll even come with you to the royal court!
"Fore God, would you would, Master Shallow.","I swear, I wish you would, Master Shallow."
Go to. I have spoke at a word. God keep you.,I meant what I said. May God keep you.
"Fare you well, gentle gentlemen.","Farewell, gentle gentlemen."
"On, Bardolph. Lead the men away.","March, Bardolph. Lead the men away."
"As I return, I will fetch off these justices. I do see the bottom of Justice Shallow. Lord, Lord, how subject we old men are to this vice of lying. This same starved justice hath done nothing but prate to me of the wildness of his youth and the word a lie, duer paid to the hearer than the Turk’s tribute. I do remember him at Clement’s Inn, like a man made after supper of a cheese paring. When he was naked, he was, for all the world, like a forked radish with a head fantastically dimensions to any thick sight were invincible. He was the very genius of famine, yet lecherous as a monkey, and the whores called him “mandrake.” He came ever in the rearward of the fashion, and sung those tunes to the and swore they were his fancies or his good-nights. And now is this Vice’s dagger become a squire, and talks as familiarly of John o' Gaunt as if he had been sworn brother to him, and I’ll be sworn he ne'er saw him but once in the","When I come back, I’ll expose these judges for the frauds that they are. I can see through this Judge Shallow. Lord, Lord; we old men sure know how to tell lies! This dried-up old judge has done nothing but go on and on to me about how wild he was when he was as a youth, and how many stunts he pulled in the seedy parts of town. Every third word he speaks is a lie, and he’ll tell lies quicker than a Turk will scramble to pay the sultan. I remember him at Clement’s Inn: he looked like a man someone carved after dinner out of a scrap of cheese. When he was naked he looked like a mandrake root The Turkish Sultan exacted notoriously harsh punishments on those who failed to pay him on time. mandrake root , with a fanciful head someone had carved in with a knife. He was so skinny that he was invisible to any man with imperfect vision; he truly was the embodiment of starvation. But he was as horny as a monkey: the whores called him “mandrake,” because mandrake stimulates the sex drive. He was always a little bit behind the times. He would hear the wagon drivers sing their songs, and then he’d go to his worn-out whores and sing them what he’d heard, pretending he had written them himself. And now this vile stick has become a landowner, and he talks about John of Gaunt like he was his own brother. I swear, he only saw Gaunt"
"Marshal’s men. I saw it and told John o' Gaunt he beat his own name, for you might have thrust him and all his apparel into an eel-skin; the case of a treble hautboy was a mansion for him, a court. And now has he land and beefs. Well, I’ll I’ll make him a philosopher’s two stones to me. If the young dace be a bait for the old pike, I see no reason in the law of nature but I may snap at him. Let time shape, and there an end.","once, and that was in the arena at the jousting tournament; John of Gaunt cut Shallow’s head with his sword. I saw it all, and I told John of Gaunt that he had beaten his own name, since Shallow was such a gaunt man back then. You could fit him and all his clothes into the skin an eel sheds. An instrument case was as huge as a mansion to him, as big as a courtroom. Now he has land and livestock. Well, I’ll be his friend if I come back. He won’t like it, but I’ll turn him into an unending source of wealth for myself. If small fish can be bait for big fish, I see no reason why I can’t snap my jaws at Shallow. Time will tell, and that’s all I have to say about that."
What is this forest called?,What’s the name of this forest?
"'Tis Gaultree Forest, an ’t shall please your Grace.","Gaultree Forest, your grace."
"Here stand, my lords, and send discoverers forth To know the numbers of our enemies.","Stop here, sirs. Send out scouts to find out how many soldiers our enemy has."
We have sent forth already.,We’ve already done that.
"'Tis well done. My friends and brethren in these great affairs, I must acquaint you that I have received New-dated letters from Northumberland, Their cold intent, tenor, and substance, thus: As might hold sortance with his quality, The which he could not levy; whereupon He is retired, to ripe his growing fortunes, To Scotland, and concludes in hearty prayers And fearful melting of their opposite.","Well done. My friends and brothers in this great undertaking, I have to share with you that I’ve received new letters from Northumberland. They have a chilling purpose, tone, and content. He says that he wishes he could be here in person, with an army as strong someone of his rank should have, but he couldn’t raise one. So he’s going to go to Scotland to increase his power. He prays that your armies will prevail against the terrible power of the enemy."
Thus do the hopes we have in him touch ground And dash themselves to pieces.,"And with that, any hope we had for him is thrown to the ground and dashed to pieces."
"Now, what news?",What’s happening?
"West of this forest, scarcely off a mile, And, by the ground they hide, I judge their number Upon or near the rate of thirty thousand.","The enemy is west of this forest, and less than a mile away. They look powerful, and, from the amount of space they’re taking up, I’d say they have close to thirty thousand soldiers."
The just proportion that we gave them out. Let us sway on and face them in the field.,That’s exactly the number we thought they had. Let’s march ahead and engage them in battle.
What well-appointed leader fronts us here?,Who’s this well-equipped leader coming here to confront us?
I think it is my Lord of Westmoreland.,I think it’s Lord Westmoreland.
"Health and fair greeting from our general, The Prince Lord John and Duke of Lancaster.","Our general, the Prince Lord John of Lancaster, sends greetings and wishes you good health."
"Say on, my Lord of Westmoreland, in peace,","Speak in peace, Lord Westmoreland. What’s the reason you’ve come here?"
"Then, my lord, Unto your Grace do I in chief address The substance of my speech. If that rebellion Came like itself, in base and abject routs, Led on by bloody youth, guarded with rage, I say, if damn’d commotion so appeared In his true, native, and most proper shape, You, reverend father, and these noble lords Had not been here to dress the ugly form","The most important part of my message is for you, your grace. You, who are a holy man, and these good gentlemen as well—you would not be here, lending dignity to this bloody insurrection, if it appeared as rebellion normally does: like a lowborn mob, led by bloody youths uniformed in rags, and supported by boys and beggars."
"With your fair honors. You, Lord Archbishop, Whose see is by a civil peace maintained, Whose beard the silver hand of peace hath touched, Whose learning and good letters peace hath tutored, The dove and very blessèd spirit of peace, Wherefore do you so ill translate yourself Out of the speech of peace, that bears such grace, Into the harsh and boist'rous tongue of war, Your pens to lances, and your tongue divine To a trumpet and a point of war?","You, Lord Archbishop—whose diocese is peaceful and law-abiding; whose beard has turned white, signifying a peaceful life; whose education and learning are the products of peaceful times; who is the dove and very blessed embodiment of peace—why are you translating yourself from the graceful language of peace into the harsh, violent language of war? You’re turning your books into coffins, your ink into blood, your pens into swords, and your holy words into a trumpet that sounds a call to arms."
"Wherefore do I this? So the question stands. Briefly, to this end: we are all diseased, Have brought ourselves into a burning fever, And we must bleed for it; of which disease Our late King Richard, being infected, died. But, my most noble Lord of Westmoreland, Nor do I as an enemy to peace Troop in the throngs of military men, But rather show awhile like fearful war To diet rank minds sick of happiness Our very veins of life. Hear me more plainly. I have in equal balance justly weighed What wrongs our arms may do, what wrongs we suffer, And find our griefs heavier than our offenses. And are enforced from our most quiet there By the rough torrent of occasion, And have the summary of all our griefs, When time shall serve, to show in articles;","Why am I doing this? That is the question. The short answer is this: we’re all sick. We’ve eaten and drunk too much and stayed up all night, and now we have a burning fever whose only cure is bloodletting. Richard, our late King, was infected with this disease and died from it. But, my good Lord Westmoreland, I’m not here as a physician, nor am I marching with this army as an enemy of peace. What I’m doing is making a frightening show of war, to stop people from indulging all their vices. This will clear the hardening of the arteries which threatens to kill us all. Let me speak more plainly. I’ve carefully considered the options, weighing the harm our armies are likely to cause against the harm we’re already suffering, and I find that our grievances are stronger than our offenses. We can see where things are headed, and the rough times ahead leave us with no choice but to step away from our quiet lives. We have a list of grievances which we can publish at the appropriate time. We offered that list to the King a long time ago, but we could never get an audience with him."
"And might by no suit gain our audience. When we are wronged and would unfold our griefs, We are denied access unto his person Even by those men that most have done us wrong. Whose memory is written on the earth With yet appearing blood, and the examples Of every minute’s instance, present now, Hath put us in these ill-beseeming arms, But to establish here a peace indeed, Concurring both in name and quality.","We were wronged, and when we tried to speak to the King about it, we were denied access to him by the very men who had wronged us most. We’re in this seemingly unbefitting armor because of the terrible recent violence—the bloodshed from which is still visible on the ground—and because of the terrible things happening now, every minute. We don’t want to harm peace in any way. We want instead to establish a peace that’s real and meaningful."
When ever yet was your appeal denied? Wherein have you been gallèd by the King? That you should seal this lawless bloody book Of forged rebellion with a seal divine And consecrate commotion’s bitter edge?,When was your request to see the King denied? How has the king harmed you? What lord in the King’s court has been sent out to do you wrong? And why would you put your holy stamp of approval on an illegal uprising and give religious blessing to a violent civil war?
"My brother general, the commonwealth, I make my quarrel in particular.","The grievances The original text of this difficult passage may be corrupted; its exact meaning is obscure. grievances borne by my fellow Englishmen, and the cruel murder of Scroop, my own brother: these are the reasons I’ve made this fight my own."
"There is no need of any such redress, Or if there were, it not belongs to you.","There’s no need for any repayment like that; and even if there were, you should not be the person to benefit."
"Why not to him in part, and to us all And suffer the condition of these times To lay a heavy and unequal hand Upon our honors?","Why shouldn’t he benefit at least a little? Why shouldn’t we all benefit, who suffered in these recent battles, and who have allowed our honor to be damaged by the terrible things happening now?"
"O, my good Lord Mowbray, Construe the times to their necessities,","Oh, my good Lord Mowbray, if you think about what is necessary in times of war, you’ll see that it is the situation"
"And not the King, that doth you injuries. Yet for your part, it not appears to me Either from the King or in the present time That you should have an inch of any ground To all the Duke of Norfolk’s seigniories, Your noble and right well remembered father’s?","that harms you, and not the King himself. But as for you in particular, it seems to me that you have no foundation on which to build a quarrel with either the King or your current situation. Wasn’t the entire estate of the Duke of Norfolk, your father, just given back to you?"
"What thing, in honor, had my father lost, That need to be revived and breathed in me? Was force perforce compelled to banish him, And then that Harry Bolingbroke and he, Being mounted and both rousèd in their seats, Their neighing coursers daring of the spur, Their eyes of fire sparking through sights of steel And the loud trumpet blowing them together, Then, then, when there was nothing could have stayed My father from the breast of Bolingbroke, His own life hung upon the staff he threw— Then threw he down himself and all their lives That by indictment and by dint of sword Have since miscarried under Bolingbroke.","What did my father lose that I now need to restore? Richard, the King at the time, loved my father, but given what was happening he had no choice but to banish him. And then, at Coventry, my father and Harry Bolingbroke met in a formal challenge The duel between Bolingbroke (now King Henry) and Norfolk (Mowbray’s father) occurs in Richard II, . . challenge . They were both mounted on their horses and ready to charge. Their horses were neighing, anxiously waiting for their riders' spurs to drive them forward. Their steel-tipped lances were ready for the attack. The visors of their helmets were down. Their eyes were on fire behind the steel slits. The trumpet sounded, and then—when there was nothing that could have stopped my father from killing Bolingbroke—the King prevented the fight by throwing down his royal scepter. That scepter was a symbol of his life; when he threw it down, he threw down his life and the lives of every man that has since died at war under the leadership of Bolingbroke."
"The Earl of Hereford was reputed then In England the most valiant gentleman. Who knows on whom fortune would then have smiled? But if your father had been victor there, For all the country in a general voice Cried hate upon him; and all their prayers and love","You don’t know what you’re talking about, Lord Mowbray. Bolingbroke at the time was considered the bravest gentleman in England. Who knows who would have won that fight? But even if your father had won, he never would have made it out of Coventry. The whole country hated him, and they loved and prayed for Bolingbroke."
"Were set on Hereford, whom they doted on And blessed and graced, indeed more than the King. Here come I from our princely general To know your griefs, to tell you from his Grace That he will give you audience; and wherein It shall appear that your demands are just, That might so much as think you enemies.","They blessed him and adored him even more than the King. But I digress. I was sent here by our general, the Prince, to hear your grievances, and to tell you that he’s prepared to listen to you. If it appears that your demands are legitimate, he’ll give you what you want—except for those things which might suggest that you’re his enemies."
"But he hath forced us to compel this offer; And it proceeds from policy, not love.",But he’s made us force him to listen to us. His offer isn’t motivated by love; it’s a political move.
"Mowbray, you overween to take it so. For, lo, within a ken our army lies, Upon mine honor, all too confident To give admittance to a thought of fear. Our battle is more full of names than yours, Our armor all as strong, our cause the best. Then reason will our hearts should be as good. Say you not then our offer is compelled.","Mowbray, you’re out of line to think that. His offer is made out of mercy, not fear. Just look, you can see our army from here. I give you my word of honor: that army is so confident, it won’t even allow the thought of fear to enter. Our army has more important people than yours, and better soldiers; our armor is every bit as strong as yours, and our cause is better. It’s only logical that we should be as courageous as you are. So don’t say you’ve forced the Prince to do anything at all."
"Well, by my will, we shall admit no parley.","Well, I say we won’t agree to any conference."
A rotten case abides no handling.,"That just proves that what you’re doing here is shameful. A rotten container falls apart at the touch; likewise, a rotten cause cannot withstand scrutiny and argument."
"Hath the Prince John a full commission, In very ample virtue of his father, To hear and absolutely to determine","Has the King given Prince John his full authorization to listen to our complaint, and address it in any way the Prince sees fit?"
That is intended in the General’s name. I muse you make so slight a question.,That goes without saying. I’m amazed you’d even ask such a foolish question.
"Then take, my Lord of Westmoreland, this schedule, For this contains our general grievances. All members of our cause, both here and hence, That are insinewed to this action, Acquitted by a true substantial form And present execution of our wills We come within our awful banks again And knit our powers to the arm of peace.","Then, Lord Westmoreland, take this document. It lists our grievances. If each complaint listed here is addressed, and if everyone on our side, both here and elsewhere, is granted a full pardon and immediate satisfaction of our demands, then we’ll return to our own boundaries again and work together for the cause of peace."
"This will I show the General. Please you, lords, In sight of both our battles we may meet, Or to the place of difference call the swords Which must decide it.","I’ll show this to the general. Please, let’s meet at a place where both our armies can see us. Then either let our talks end in peace—God willing!—or let us take the fight to the battlefield where it will be decided."
"My lord, we will do so.","My lord, we will do so."
There is a thing within my bosom tells me That no conditions of our peace can stand.,Something in my heart tells me that no peace we agree to could possibly last.
"Upon such large terms and so absolute As our conditions shall consist upon, Our peace shall stand as firm as rocky mountains.","Don’t worry about that. If we can come to terms that are as comprehensive as the ones we’re insisting upon, then the peace will be as durable as rocky mountains."
"Yea, but our valuation shall be such Yea, every idle, nice, and wanton reason, Shall to the King taste of this action,","Yes, but in the future the King will think so poorly of us that every little slight, every false accusation, every tiny, silly, frivolous thing will seem to him to be a revival of this rebellion. Even if we were as devoted to the King as martyrs are to their causes, he’ll regard us so skeptically that even the good things we do for him"
"That, were our royal faiths martyrs in love, We shall be winnowed with so rough a wind And good from bad find no partition.",won’t count; he won’t be able to distinguish them from the bad.
"No, no, my lord. Note this: the King is weary Of dainty and such picking grievances, For he hath found to end one doubt by death And therefore will he wipe his tables clean And keep no telltale to his memory That may repeat and history his loss To new remembrance. For full well he knows As his misdoubts present occasion; His foes are so enrooted with his friends That, plucking to unfix an enemy, He doth unfasten so and shake a friend; That hath enraged him on to offer strokes, As he is striking holds his infant up And hangs resolved correction in the arm That was upreared to execution.","No, no, sir. Listen, the king is tired of getting upset over every little thing. He’s discovered that ending one problem by killing someone only creates two bigger problems in the people left alive. So from now on, he’ll wipe his memory clean, and forget anything that might remind him of the bad things from his past. He knows that he can’t just eliminate every single opponent who crops up. His enemies are rooted in with his friends, to the extent that, if he tries to pull up an enemy, he’ll also uproot and discard a friend. This country’s like a misbehaving wife, who, just when her husband is about to hit her, holds his baby up, and freezes the intended punishment in the very arm that was poised to apply it."
"On late offenders, that he now doth lack The very instruments of chastisement, So that his power, like to a fangless lion, May offer but not hold.","Besides, the King has expended all his energy for punishment on the recent rebellion. He has nothing left to punish with. His power is like a lion with no teeth: it can threaten, but it can’t do any harm."
"'Tis very true, If we do now make our atonement well, Our peace will, like a broken limb united, Grow stronger for the breaking.","That’s true. Rest assured, my good Lord Marshal, if our reconciliation is sincere, then peace will be like a broken bone, which grows stronger for having once been broken."
Be it so. Here is returned my Lord of Westmoreland.,I hope so. Lord Westmoreland is back.
To meet his Grace just distance ’tween our armies.,"The Prince is nearby. If you will, please meet him at a spot halfway between our two armies."
"Your Grace of York, in God’s name then set forward.","Your grace, Archbishop of York, go forward in God’s name."
"Before, and greet his Grace.—(to WESTMORELAND) My lord, we come.","Lead on, and greet his highness. (to WESTMORELAND) Sir, we’re on our way."
"You are well encountered here, my cousin Mowbray.— And so to you, Lord Hastings, and to all.— My Lord of York, it better showed with you When that your flock, assembled by the bell, Encircled you to hear with reverence Than now to see you here, an iron man talking, Cheering a rout of rebels with your drum, Turning the word to sword, and life to death. That man that sits within a monarch’s heart Would he abuse the countenance of the King, Alack, what mischiefs might he set abroach In shadow of such greatness! With you, Lord Bishop,","I’m glad to see you, my cousin Mowbray. Good day to you, gentle Archbishop, and to you, Lord Hastings, and to all. Lord Archbishop, it was better to see you when worshippers—called together by the church bell—surrounded you to hear Biblical sermons than it is to see you here, in armor; cheering a mob of rebels with your war drums, turning your words to weapons, and your life into death. When a man is close to the King’s heart, and grows strong under the King’s protection, only to turn against him—alas! What evils that man will unleash, hidden from view by the King’s own reputation! This is exactly how it is with you, Lord Bishop. Who hasn’t heard how profound your religious knowledge is? To us, you were our representative in God’s own parliament. To us, you might as well have been"
"It is even so. Who hath not heard it spoken To us the speaker in His parliament, To us th' imagined voice of God himself, The very opener and intelligencer Between the grace, the sanctities, of heaven, But you misuse the reverence of your place, Employ the countenance and grace of heaven As a false favorite doth his prince’s name, In deeds dishonorable? You have ta'en up, The subjects of His substitute, my father, And both against the peace of heaven and him Have here up-swarmed them.","God’s own voice: the interpreter and ambassador between God’s heavenly ways and our own dull, mortal actions. And now, who would say anything but that you are abusing the holiness of your position, using the outward show of godliness to do terrible things, like a treacherous courtier uses the King’s good name? You have pretended to be acting in God’s name as you encourage the subjects of God’s deputy, my father, to rise up against the peace of both heaven and the King."
"Good my Lord of Lancaster, But, as I told my Lord of Westmoreland, The time misordered doth, in common sense, Crowd us and crush us to this monstrous form To hold our safety up. I sent your Grace The which hath been with scorn shoved from the court, Whereon this Hydra son of war is born, Whose dangerous eyes may well be charmed asleep With grant of our most just and right desires, Stoop tamely to the foot of majesty.","Good Lord of Lancaster, I am not here as an enemy your father’s peace. But, as I told Westmoreland, these tumultuous times have forced us to behave in these monstrous ways, out of common sense and a regard for our own safety. I sent you a detailed list of our grievances, but you angrily shoved it aside. That’s why this Hydra of a war The Hydra was a monster with many heads; each time a head was cut off, a new one would grow in its place. Hydra of a war has broken out. You can get rid of it by agreeing to the just and right things we demand. If you do that, this disease of war will be cured, and the monster will bow at your feet, tame and obedient."
"If not, we ready are to try our fortunes To the last man.","If you don’t, we’re ready to fight to the last man."
"And though we here fall down, We have supplies to second our attempt;","And if those of us who are here should fail, we have reinforcements 								standing by. If they fail, they have reinforcements to back them up,"
"And so success of mischief shall be born, And heir from heir shall hold this quarrel up Whiles England shall have generation.",and in this way the fight will go on from father to son for all time until England itself has no more new generations.
"You are too shallow, Hastings, much too shallow","You’re not wise enough, Hastings, not wise enough at all to see into eternity."
Pleaseth your Grace to answer them directly How far forth you do like their articles.,"Your highness, why not tell them directly what you think of their list of grievances."
"I like them all, and do allow them well, And swear here by the honor of my blood, And some about him have too lavishly Wrested his meaning and authority. (to ARCHBISHOP) My lord, these griefs shall be with speed redressed; Upon my soul, they shall. If this may please you, As we will ours, and here, between the armies, Let’s drink together friendly and embrace, That all their eyes may bear those tokens home Of our restorèd love and amity.","I agree with all of them, and I admit that they’re legitimate. I swear, on my family’s honor: my father’s intentions have been misunderstood, and some of his subordinates have overstepped their authority in executing his orders. (to ARCHBISHOP) Sir, we will make good on the wrongs that have been done to you, I swear on my soul. If this pleases you, then disperse your armies and send them back where they came from; we shall do the same. And here, where both armies can see us, we’ll embrace and drink a friendly toast to one another. The soldiers will go home with evidence that we’re friends once again."
I take your princely word for these redresses.,I’ll take your word as a prince that you’ll make good on these things.
"I give it you, and will maintain my word, And thereupon I drink unto your Grace.","I give you my word, and I’ll keep it. And with that, I drink a toast to you."
"Go, captain, and deliver to the army This news of peace. Let them have pay, and part.","Go, captain. Tell the army this news of peace. Pay them, and send them away. I know it will make them happy. Hurry, captain."
"To you, my noble Lord of Westmoreland.","Here’s to you, good Lord Westmoreland."
"I pledge your Grace, and if you knew what pains I have bestowed to breed this present peace, You would drink freely. But my love to you","I drink to your grace. If you knew how hard I’ve worked to bring about this peaceful resolution, you’d really drink up. But my love for you will be more apparent from now on."
I do not doubt you.,I don’t doubt it.
"I am glad of it.— Health to my lord and gentle cousin, Mowbray.","I’m glad. And here’s to your health, my gentle cousin Lord Mowbray."
"You wish me health in very happy season, For I am on the sudden something ill.","You wish me good health at a very good moment, because for some reason I’m suddenly feeling ill."
But heaviness foreruns the good event.,"Men are always merry in the face of bad situations, but a heavy heart predicts a happy event."
"Therefore be merry, coz; since sudden sorrow Serves to say thus: “Some good thing comes tomorrow.”","So be happy, kinsman. A sudden feeling of melancholy is just a sign that says, “Something good is coming tomorrow.”"
"Believe me, I am passing light in spirit.","Believe me, I’m in really good spirits."
So much the worse if your own rule be true.,"Which is not a good thing, if your own rule is correct."
The word of peace is rendered. Hark how they shout.,The news of peace has been announced. Listen to them shout!
This had been cheerful after victory.,They sound like they are cheering a victory.
"A peace is of the nature of a conquest, For then both parties nobly are subdued,","Peace is a victory of sorts: both sides stop fighting honorably, but neither loses."
"Go, my lord, And let our army be dischargèd too.","Go and disperse our army, too, Lord Westmoreland."
"And, good my lord, so please you, let our trains March by us, that we may peruse the men We should have coped withal.","Good Archbishop, let’s have both our troops march past us here so that we can see the men we would have fought against."
"Go, good Lord Hastings,","Go, Lord Hastings, and have them march past before they’re dismissed."
"I trust, lords, we shall lie tonight together.","I hope, sirs, that we’ll spend tonight in the same camp."
"Now, cousin, wherefore stands our army still?","Cousin, why is our army still standing?"
"The leaders, having charge from you to stand, Will not go off until they hear you speak.","The leaders have orders from you to stand fast, and they won’t disperse until they hear you give the order."
They know their duties.,They know how to follow orders.
"My lord, our army is dispersed already. Like youthful steers unyoked, they take their courses East, west, north, south, or, like a school broke up, Each hurries toward his home and sporting-place.","Our army is already dispersed. They’ve headed off to the east, west, north, and south like young bulls whose yokes have been removed. The men are like children after school, each hurrying toward their homes or the playground."
"I do arrest thee, traitor, of high treason.— And you, Lord Archbishop, and you, Lord Mowbray, Of capital treason I attach you both.","That’s good news, Lord Hastings. And hearing it, I now arrest you, traitor, for high treason. And you, Archbishop, and you, Lord Mowbray. I arrest you both for capital treason."
Is this proceeding just and honorable?,Is this action just and honorable?
Is your assembly so?,Was your rebellion just and honorable?
Will you thus break your faith?,Will you break faith with us like this?
"I pawned thee none. I promised you redress of these same grievances Whereof you did complain, which, by mine honor, I will perform with a most Christian care. Meet for rebellion and such acts as yours. Most shallowly did you these arms commence, Fondly brought here, and foolishly sent hence.— Strike up our drums; pursue the scattered stray. Some guard these traitors to the block of death, Treason’s true bed and yielder-up of breath.","I never promised you my faith. I promised to make good on the grievances you complained of. And, on my honor, I will do that as carefully as possible. But now, you rebels will get exactly what you deserve for the things you’ve done. You raised armies over nothing, brought them here stupidly, and then foolishly sent them away. Bang on our drums! Capture the soldiers who are scattering away. God, not we, has fought today and won. Guards, escort these traitors to the place of their death. That’s where treason belongs, and where they’ll draw their last breath."
"What’s your name, sir? Of what condition are you, and of what place, I pray?","What’s your name, sir? What’s your rank, and where are you from?"
"I am a knight, sir, and my name is Colevile of the Dale.","I am a knight, sir. My name is Coleville of the Valley."
"Well, then, Colevile is your name, a knight is your degree, traitor your degree, and the dungeon your place, a place deep enough so shall you be still Colevile of the Dale.","Well, then, Coleville is your name, your rank is knight, and the valley is where you’re from. Coleville will still be your name now that “traitor” is your rank, and the dungeon is where you’ll be. It’s a place so deep that you’ll still be in a kind of valley."
Are not you Sir John Falstaff?,Aren’t you Sir John Falstaff?
"As good a man as he, sir, whoe'er I am. Do ye yield, sir, or lovers and they weep for thy death. Therefore rouse up fear and trembling, and do observance to my mercy.","I’m as good a man as Falstaff, whoever I am. Will you surrender? Or am I going to have to break a sweat making you surrender? If I sweat, the drops will be the tears of your loved ones, weeping over your death. So you’d better get scared and start to shake, and start praying to me for mercy."
"I think you are Sir John Falstaff, and in that thought yield me.","I think you are Sir John Falstaff, and so I surrender."
"I have a whole school of tongues in this belly of mine, and not a tongue of them all speaks any other word but my name. An I had but a belly of any indifferency, I were simply the most active fellow in Europe. My womb, my womb, my womb undoes me. Here comes our general.","My enormous belly can speak in many languages, and each language proclaims my name and my name alone. If I had a moderately sized belly, all I’d be is an anonymous but very successful soldier. But my belly, my belly, my belly blows my cover. Here comes the general."
The heat is past. Follow no further now.,The danger’s over: let’s stop here.
"Call in the powers, good cousin Westmoreland.","Call off the operation, Westmoreland."
"Now, Falstaff, where have you been all this while? When everything is ended, then you come. One time or other break some gallows' back.","Falstaff, where have you been all this time? When everything is over, that’s when you start. This habit of laziness of yours will bust a gallows to bits one of these days, mark my words."
"I would be sorry, my lord, but it should be thus. I never knew yet but rebuke and check was the reward of valor. Do you think me a swallow, an arrow, or a bullet? Have I in my poor hither with the very extremest inch of possibility. I have foundered ninescore and odd posts, and here, travel-tainted as I am, have in my pure and immaculate valor taken Sir John Colevile of the Dale, a most furious knight and that I may justly say, with the hook-nosed fellow of Rome, “There, cousin, I came, saw, and overcame.”","I’m sorry to hear you say that: I never realized that brave behavior should be rewarded with scolding and admonishing. Do you think I’m a bird, or an arrow, or a bullet? With this old, broken-down body, do you think I can move as fast as thought? I’ve gotten here as fast as humanly possible. I’ve burned out more than horses, and—even though I’m spent from all that travel—I’ve managed, with my extraordinary bravery, to capture Sir John Coleville of the Valley, a brave knight and terrible enemy. But so what? He simply saw me and surrendered. So I can say, just like Julius Caesar, that “I came, I saw, I conquered.”"
It was more of his courtesy than your deserving.,He was just being polite; it’s not as if you did something to deserve it.
"I know not. Here he is, and here I yield him. And I beseech or, by the Lord, I will have it in a particular ballad else, with mine own picture on the top on ’t, Colevile kissing my foot; to the which course if I be enforced, if you do not all show","I don’t know about that. Here he is: I turn him over to you. Please, sir, have it added to the record of things accomplished today. If you don’t, I’ll have a ballad printed about it, with a picture of Coleville kissing my foot on the cover. And if I’m forced to do that, and I"
"like gilt twopences to me, and I in the clear sky of fame o'ershine you as much as the full moon doth the cinders of the element (which show like pins' heads to her), believe not the word of the noble. Therefore let me have right, and let desert mount.","don’t make you look like counterfeits next to me, and if my fame doesn’t outshine yours like the full moon outshines the stars (which look like pin pricks in the sky next to the moon)—well then, you can call me a liar. Now give me what I deserve, and let my merits mount on top of each other, in a great pile."
Thine’s too heavy to mount.,Your pile would be too heavy for me to bear.
"Let it shine, then.","Let my merits shine, then."
Thine’s too thick to shine.,You’re too dense to shine.
"Let it do something, my good lord, that may do me good, and call it what you will.","Then let it do something that will do me good, whatever you want to call it."
Is thy name Colevile?,Is your name Coleville?
"It is, my lord.","It is, sir."
"A famous rebel art thou, Colevile.","You’re a famous rebel, Coleville."
And a famous true subject took him.,And a famous and loyal subject captured him.
"I am, my lord, but as my betters are That led me hither. Had they been ruled by me,","I’m now in the same situation as my superiors, who led me here. But if I had been in charge, your victory would have cost you more than it has."
"I know not how they sold themselves, but thou, like a kind fellow, gavest thyself away gratis, and I thank thee for thee.","I don’t know how much your superiors cost us, but you, like a generous man, gave yourself away for free, and I thank you for it."
"Now, have you left pursuit?",Have you called off the troops?
Retreat is made and execution stayed.,"The order to pull back has been given, and the slaughter has been stopped."
"Send Colevile with his confederates Blunt, lead him hence, and see you guard him sure.","Send Coleville and his confederates to York, to be put to death immediately. Blunt, lead him away, and guard him carefully."
"And now dispatch we toward the court, my lords. I hear the King my father is sore sick. Our news shall go before us to his Majesty, him, And we with sober speed will follow you.","And now, let’s get going back to the royal court: I understand that the King, my father, is gravely ill. Send news of our victory ahead of us. (to WESTMORELAND) You, cousin, will bring him this news and comfort him with it. We’ll follow you as quickly as we can."
"My lord, I beseech you give me leave to go through Gloucestershire, and, when you come to court, stand my good lord, pray, in your good report.","Sir, please give me permission to go via Gloucestershire. When you get to the court, please vouch for my good work here."
Shall better speak of you than you deserve.,"Goodbye, Falstaff. By speaking on your behalf as a prince, I’ll be speaking better of you than you deserve."
"I would you had but the wit; ’twere better than your dukedom. Good faith, this same young sober-blooded boy doth not love me, nor a man cannot make him laugh. But these demure boys come to any proof, for thin drink doth so overcool their blood, and making many fish meals, that they fall into a kind of male green-sickness, and then, when they marry, they get wenches. They are generally fools and inflammation.","I wish you had the wit to accomplish that: it would be worth all your land. My goodness, this young, serious-minded boy doesn’t like me, and no one can make him laugh. But I guess that’s not surprising; after all, he doesn’t drink any wine. None of those prim boys ever amount to anything: weak beer and too many fish dinners makes their blood cool. They all turn anemic, like young girls. And then, when they finally get married, they can only father girls because they don’t have the stuff to produce sons. Non-drinkers are all generally fools and cowards. The rest of us would probably be"
"A good sherris sack hath a two-fold operation in it. It ascends me into the brain, dries me there all the foolish and dull and crury vapors which environ it, makes it delectable shapes, which, delivered o'er to the voice, the tongue, which is the birth, becomes excellent wit. The second property of your excellent sherris is the warming of the blood, which, before cold and settled, left the liver white But the sherris warms it and makes it course from the inwards to the parts' extremes. It illumineth the face, which as a beacon gives warning to all the rest of this little kingdom, man, to arm; and then the vital commoners and who, great and puffed up with this retinue, doth any deed of courage, and this valor comes of sherris. So that skill in the weapon is nothing without sack, for that sets it a-work; and learning a mere hoard of gold kept by a devil till sack Prince Harry is valiant, for the cold blood he did naturally inherit of his father he hath, like lean, sterile, and bare land, manured, husbanded, and tilled with excellent endeavor of drinking good and good store of fertile sherris, that he is first human principle I would teach them should be to forswear thin potations and to addict themselves to sack.","the same way, except that we’re always drunk. A good sherry wine operates in two ways. First, it rises into the brain and dries out all the foolish, dull, clogged-up fogs that have gathered there. It makes the brain sharp, quick, and inventive; full of nimble, fiery, and beautiful ideas. The voice and tongue give birth to those ideas which, when they grow up, become excellent wit. The second power of good wine is the warming of the blood. Before wine, the blood is cold and sluggish, and this makes the liver—the organ of passion—chilly and pale. A chilly, pale liver is the sign of cowardice and faint-heartedness. But wine warms the blood, making it course from the inner organs to all the extremities. The blood brightens the face, and the rest of the body—which is like a little kingdom in itself—takes that brightening as a signal. Then the spirits of the blood and all the internal organs gather together behind their captain: the heart. The heart draws strength from these followers and, enlarged by them, can accomplish any courageous deed. This is the bravery that comes from wine. Without wine, skill in weaponry doesn’t matter. Wine is what sets that skill in motion. Education is nothing more than idle gold in the devil’s hands, until wine rouses it and puts it to good use. That’s how Prince Harry became valiant. He’s taken the cold blood he inherited from his father and—like unproductive farmland—he fertilized it, planted it, and cared for it, through the hard work of drinking vast amounts of good and potent wine. And so now, he’s become hot and courageous. If I had a thousand sons, the first rule of behavior I would teach them would be to avoid weak drinks, and get themselves addicted to wine."
"How now, Bardolph?","What is it, Bardolph?"
The army is discharged all and gone.,"The army is dismissed, and everyone’s gone."
"visit Master Robert Shallow, Esquire. I have him already temp'ring between my finger and my thumb, and shortly will I seal with him. Come away.","Let them go. I’ll head to Gloucestershire. I’ll visit Master Robert Shallow, Esquire. I’ve already got him under my thumb, as soft as wax. Soon I’ll seal the deal. Let’s go."
"Now, lords, if God doth give successful end To this debate that bleedeth at our doors, We will our youth lead on to higher fields And draw no swords but what are sanctified. Our substitutes in absence well invested, And everything lies level to our wish. Only we want a little personal strength; And pause us till these rebels now afoot","Now, my lords: if God grants us a victory in this violent civil war that bleeds at our very doorsteps, I will lead our young people in a greater cause, and fight nothing but holy wars. Our navy is ready, our army is assembled, the leaders who are my subordinates have their orders, and everything is standing by to achieve my main aim. The only drawback is that I’m feeling a little weak. So let’s wait a short while, until the rebels, now on the run, are brought back in line and are made obedient again."
Both which we doubt not but your Majesty Shall soon enjoy.,We are sure that you’ll soon enjoy both good health and the rebels' defeat.
"Humphrey, my son of Gloucester, Where is the Prince your brother?","My son Humphrey of Gloucester, where is your brother, Prince Hal?"
"I think he’s gone to hunt, my lord, at Windsor.",I think he’s gone hunting at Windsor.
And how accompanied?,Who’s with him?
"I do not know, my lord.","I don’t know, father."
Is not his brother Thomas of Clarence with him?,"Isn’t his brother, Thomas of Clarence, with him?"
"No, my good lord, he is in presence here.","No, father. He’s here."
What would my lord and father?,"What is it you’d like, father?"
"Nothing but well to thee, Thomas of Clarence. He loves thee, and thou dost neglect him, Thomas. Thou hast a better place in his affection Than all thy brothers. Cherish it, my boy, And noble offices thou mayst effect Between his greatness and thy other brethren. Therefore omit him not; blunt not his love, Nor lose the good advantage of his grace By seeming cold or careless of his will. He hath a tear for pity and a hand Open as day for melting charity; Yet notwithstanding, being incensed he is flint, As humorous as winter, and as sudden His temper therefore must be well observed. Chide him for faults, and do it reverently, When thou perceive his blood inclined to mirth; But, being moody, give him time and scope Confound themselves with working. Learn this, Thomas, And thou shalt prove a shelter to thy friends, A hoop of gold to bind thy brothers in, That the united vessel of their blood, (As, force perforce, the age will pour it in), Shall never leak, though it do work as strong As aconitum or rash gunpowder.","Only good things for you, Thomas. Why aren’t you with the Prince, your brother? He loves you and you are neglecting him. He cares more about you than any of his other brothers, Thomas; cherish that fact, my boy. After I’m dead, you’ll be in a strong position to help maintain good relations between Prince Hal and his brothers. So don’t ignore him. Don’t turn away his love, and don’t ruin your good relationship with him by seeming cold or distant. He’s kind if he gets his way; he has compassion for others, and he’s generous with charity. But despite all this, once he gets angry, he becomes like a stone. He can be as tempestuous as winter, and can change himself as suddenly as snowflakes at dawn can turn to hail. So watch his temper. When he does something wrong, let him know it—gently, and when he’s in a happy mood. But when he’s ornery, give him room. Wait till his bad mood works itself out, like a beached whale that kills itself by struggling to return to sea. If you can do this, you’ll be a shelter for your friends, and a golden chain that links your brothers together. Once they’re united, the poison of criticism and rumor—which in this day and age is sure to be aimed at them—can’t do them any harm, no matter how explosive and destructive it may be."
I shall observe him with all care and love.,I’ll watch over him with as much care and love as possible.
"Why art thou not at Windsor with him, Thomas?",Then why aren’t you with him at Windsor?
He is not there today; he dines in London.,He’s not there today. He’s in London.
And how accompanied? Canst thou tell that?,Who’s with him? Do you know?
With Poins and other his continual followers.,"Poins, and the usual suspects."
"Most subject is the fattest soil to weeds, Is overspread with them; therefore my grief Stretches itself beyond the hour of death. The blood weeps from my heart when I do shape, In forms imaginary, th' unguided days When I am sleeping with my ancestors. For when his headstrong riot hath no curb, When rage and hot blood are his counsellors, When means and lavish manners meet together, Towards fronting peril and opposed decay!","Weeds grow best in the richest soil, and he—like myself at that age—is overrun by them. My sadness, then, cannot end with my death. When I imagine the lawless days and rotten times that you will face when I am dead and sleeping with my ancestors, the blood weeps from my heart. When Hal’s headstrong wildness has free rein; when aggression and passion are his advisors; when he has full opportunity to indulge in his riotous inclinations, then—Oh!—his criminal desires will fly like a bird towards danger and ruin."
"My gracious lord, you look beyond him quite. The Prince but studies his companions Like a strange tongue, wherein, to gain the language, Be looked upon and learned; which, once attained, Your Highness knows, comes to no further use But to be known and hated. So, like gross terms, The Prince will, in the perfectness of time, Shall as a pattern or a measure live, By which his Grace must mete the lives of others, Turning past evils to advantages.","Your highness, you’ve got him all wrong. The Prince is only studying his criminal companions, the way one studies a foreign language. In order to truly learn a language, one must learn even the most immodest curse word—which, as you know, is only learned in order to be identified and, thereafter, avoided. So, like vulgar language, the Prince will get rid of his followers when the time is right. Then they’ll live on in his memory as guidelines, by which he’ll judge the conduct of others. In this sense, he’ll change his past bad deeds to good ends."
'Tis seldom when the bee doth leave her comb,It’s rare that a bee builds its nest in a dead animal’s carcass. The Prince won’t leave his current company.
Who’s here? Westmoreland?,Who’s there? Westmoreland?
"Health to my sovereign, and new happiness Added to that that I am to deliver. Prince John your son doth kiss your Grace’s hand. Mowbray, the Bishop Scroop, Hastings, and all There is not now a rebel’s sword unsheathed But peace puts forth her olive everywhere. The manner how this action hath been borne Here at more leisure may your Highness read","I wish your highness good health, and happy news beyond the report I have to deliver! Prince John sends his respects: Mowbray, the Archbishop, Hastings and the rest are under arrest. There are no more rebels anywhere; the olive branch of peace has been extended everywhere. Here’s a letter explaining what happened. When you have time, you can read it and learn every detail."
"O Westmoreland, thou art a summer bird, Which ever in the haunch of winter sings The lifting up of day.","Oh Westmoreland; you’re like a summer bird, which sings the dawn in as winter ends."
Here comes more news.,"Look, here’s more news."
"And when they stand against you, may they fall As those that I am come to tell you of. The Earl Northumberland and the Lord Bardolph, With a great power of English and of Scots, The manner and true order of the fight This packet, please it you, contains at large.","May heaven protect your highness from all enemies—and when they do rise up, may they fall just like the ones I’ve come to tell you about. The Earl of Northumberland and Lord Bardolph, with their mighty armies of Englishmen and Scotsmen, were defeated by the Sheriff of Yorkshire. This letter will tell you the details."
"And wherefore should these good news make me sick? Will fortune never come with both hands full, She either gives a stomach and no food—",Why am I sick at this good news? Why can’t life ever bring you things with their appropriate complements? Why is good news so often conveyed in ugly terms? Life either gives you hunger but no food—which is the
"Such are the poor, in health—or else a feast And takes away the stomach—such are the rich, That have abundance and enjoy it not. And now my sight fails, and my brain is giddy. O, me! Come near me, now I am much ill.","experience of poor, healthy people—or it gives you a feast with no appetite—which is how the rich live, who have wealth and abundance but cannot enjoy it. I should be celebrating this good news, and yet my eyesight is failing, and my brain is delirious. Oh God! Come to me, I’m very sick."
"Comfort, your Majesty.","Take care, your highness!"
"O, my royal father!","Oh, my royal father!"
"My sovereign lord, cheer up yourself, look up.","My lord, feel better; take courage."
"Are with his Highness very ordinary. Stand from him, give him air. He’ll straight be well.","Wait a minute, princes. You know his highness has these episodes all the time. Move away from him. Give him air; he’ll be all right soon."
"No, no, he cannot long hold out these pangs. Th' incessant care and labor of his mind So thin that life looks through and will break out.","No, no, he can’t survive these attacks much longer. His mind’s endless worry and concern have so shaken his body that it can barely hold together."
"The people fear me, for they do observe Unfathered heirs and loathly births of nature. The seasons change their manners, as the year","The people are frightening me. They’ve seen terrible omens: children who seem to have supernatural fathers, and gruesomely deformed infants. The weather is in disarray, as if the calendar discovered some months were fast asleep, and decided to skip over them."
"The river hath thrice flowed, no ebb between, And the old folk, time’s doting chronicles, Say it did so a little time before That our great-grandsire, Edward, sicked and died.","The river has flooded three times, without receding between floods. The old people—those living history books—say that the last time this happened was when our great-grandfather, King Edward, fell ill and died."
"Speak lower, princes, for the King recovers.","Speak more softly, princes: the King is recovering."
This apoplexy will certain be his end.,These attacks will be the death of him.
"I pray you, take me up and bear me hence Into some other chamber. Softly, pray.","Please, carry me into another room. Quietly. Please."
"Let there be no noise made, my gentle friends, Will whisper music to my weary spirit.","Please be silent, my friends, unless someone can play some restful, whispering music for my exhausted spirit."
Call for the music in the other room.,Call the musicians in from the other room.
Set me the crown upon my pillow here.,Put the crown here on my pillow.
"His eye is hollow, and he changes much.","His eyes are sunken, and he seems very pale."
"Less noise, less noise.","Less noise, less noise!"
Who saw the Duke of Clarence?,Has anybody seen the Duke of Clarence?
"I am here, brother, full of heaviness.","I’m here, brother, full of sadness."
"How now! Rain within doors, and none abroad? How doth the King?",What’s going on? Raining inside while it’s dry outside? How’s the King?
Exceeding ill.,Extremely sick.
Heard he the good news yet? Tell it him.,Has he heard the good news yet? Tell him.
He altered much upon the hearing it.,"Yes, he heard it, and it affected him deeply."
"If he be sick with joy, he’ll recover without physic.","If he’s sick from joy, then he’ll get better without medicine."
"Not so much noise, my lords.—Sweet Prince, speak low. The King your father is disposed to sleep.","Not so loud, sirs. Prince, speak more quietly. Your father the King is trying to sleep."
Let us withdraw into the other room.,Let’s go into the other room.
Will ’t please your Grace to go along with us?,Will you come with us?
"No, I will sit and watch here by the King.",No. I’ll stay here with the King.
"Why doth the crown lie there upon his pillow, Being so troublesome a bedfellow? O polished perturbation, golden care, To many a watchful night! sleep with it now; Yet not so sound and half so deeply sweet As he whose brow with homely biggen bound Snores out the watch of night. O majesty, Like a rich armor worn in heat of day, That scald’st with safety. By his gates of breath There lies a downy feather which stirs not; Did he suspire, that light and weightless down This sleep is sound indeed. This is a sleep That from this golden rigol hath divorced So many English kings. Thy due from me Is tears and heavy sorrows of the blood, Shall, O dear father, pay thee plenteously. My due from thee is this imperial crown, Which, as immediate as thy place and blood,","Why does the crown lie there on his pillow, when it’s such a troublesome bedfellow? Oh polished aggravation, golden anxiety! You keep the eyelids open wide, to face countless sleepless nights. You sleep with the crown now, father, but you don’t sleep as soundly, or half so deeply, as that man whose head is bound with nothing more than a cheap nightcap, who snores through the night. Oh, you crown! When you pinch the person wearing you, you’re like a great suit of armor worn on a hot day—you burn the person you’re protecting. There’s a feather near my father’s lips, and it’s not moving: if he were breathing, that light, weightless thing would move. My gracious lord! Father! This is a deep sleep indeed—this is a sleep that has removed the golden ring from the heads of many English kings. Father, I owe you tears and a deep grief, and my love, the bonds of family, and a son’s tender feelings will make sure that I pay you lavishly. Your debt to me is this kingly crown, which I am owed as your heir-apparent."
"Derives itself to me. (he puts the crown on his head) Lo, where it sits, Into one giant arm, it shall not force This lineal honor from me. This from thee Will I to mine leave, as ’tis left to me.","(he puts the crown on his head) Look, here it sits, and God will guard it. Even if all the strength in the world were gathered into a single, giant arm, it wouldn’t be able to force this inherited honor from me. I will leave this to my son as you’ve left it to me."
(waking) Warwick! Gloucester! Clarence!,(waking) Warwick! Gloucester! Clarence!
Doth the King call?,"Did you call, sir?"
What would your Majesty? How fares your Grace?,"What can we do for you, your highness? How are you feeling?"
"Why did you leave me here alone, my lords?","Why did you leave me alone, sirs?"
"We left the Prince my brother here, my liege, Who undertook to sit and watch by you.","We left my brother, Prince Hal, here. He decided to sit with you."
The Prince of Wales? Where is he? Let me see him.,The Prince of Wales? Where is he? I want to see him. He’s not here.
This door is open. He is gone this way.,This door’s open. He went this way.
He came not through the chamber where we stayed.,He didn’t come through the room we were in.
Where is the crown? Who took it from my pillow?,Where’s the crown? Who took it off my pillow?
"When we withdrew, my liege, we left it here.","When we left, sir, it was here."
"Is he so hasty that he doth suppose my sleep my death? Find him, my Lord of Warwick. Chide him hither.","The Prince has taken it. Go, find him. Is he in such a hurry that he thinks my sleep is my death? Find him, Lord Warwick. Rebuke him, and bring him here."
"This part of his conjoins with my disease And helps to end me. See, sons, what things you are, When gold becomes her object! For this the foolish overcareful fathers Have broke their sleep with thoughts, Their brains with care, their bones with industry. The canker’d heaps of strange-achievèd gold. For this they have been thoughtful to invest Their sons with arts and martial exercises— When, like the bee, tolling from every flower Our thighs packed with wax, our mouths with honey, We bring it to the hive and, like the bees, Are murdered for our pains. This bitter taste Yield his engrossments to the ending father.","Henry’s actions join forces with my illness, and together they will kill me. Sons, look at what things you are. See how quickly blood bonds are broken, once money’s involved. This is what happens to foolish, overly concerned fathers who ruin their sleep with worry, burden their minds with anxiety, and break their bodies with hard work. This is what happens to fathers who amass vast amounts of money, earned in unsavory ways. This is what happens to fathers who have taken care to give their sons good educations, and train them in matters of war. Fathers are like bees, collecting sweet pollen from all the flowers in the world. We pack our thighs full of wax and our mouths full of honey, only to be killed when we return to the hive. This is the bitter fate of the dying father, no matter what he has accumulated in his life."
Till his friend sickness hath determined me?,"Where is that impatient man who can’t even wait for his friend, sickness, to put an end to me?"
"My lord, I found the Prince in the next room, Washing with kindly tears his gentle cheeks, With such a deep demeanor in great sorrow Would, by beholding him, have washed his knife With gentle eyedrops. He is coming hither.","Sir, I found the Prince in the next room, with tears flowing down his cheeks. He looked so sorrowful that a tyrant—who never drank anything but blood—would, upon seeing him, have washed the blood from his knife with tears. He’s on his way."
But wherefore did he take away the crown?,But why did he take away the crown?
"Lo where he comes.—Come hither to me, Harry.—","Look, here he comes. Come here, Harry. (to the rest) Leave the room, and leave us here alone."
I never thought to hear you speak again.,I never thought I’d hear you speak again.
"Thy wish was father, Harry, to that thought. I stay too long by thee; I weary thee. Dost thou so hunger for mine empty chair Before thy hour be ripe? O foolish youth, Thou seek’st the greatness that will overwhelm thee. Stay but a little, for my cloud of dignity Is held from falling with so weak a wind Thou hast stol'n that which after some few hours Were thine without offense, and at my death Thou hast sealed up my expectation. Thy life did manifest thou loved’st me not, Thou hid’st a thousand daggers in thy thoughts, Which thou hast whetted on thy stony heart To stab at half an hour of my life. What, canst thou not forbear me half an hour? And bid the merry bells ring to thine ear That thou art crownèd, not that I am dead. Let all the tears that should bedew my hearse Be drops of balm to sanctify thy head; Give that which gave thee life unto the worms. Pluck down my officers, break my decrees,","You thought that because you wished it to be true. I live too long for you; you’re tired of me. Are you so desperate for my throne that you would take the honors of kingship before it’s your time? Oh you foolish youth! You long for power that will end up overwhelming you. Wait a little while. What power I have left is held together so weakly that the lightest breeze would blow it away: my life is fading. You stole something from me that would freely have been yours in just a few hours. On my deathbed, you’ve confirmed all my expectations. All your life you showed that you didn’t love me, and now I will die certain of it. There are a thousand daggers in your thoughts, which you’ve sharpened on your stony heart with the hopes of stabbing me in the little time I have left. What? Couldn’t you endure me for half an hour? Then go and dig my grave yourself, and ring the bells to mark your coronation, not my death. Let all the tears that should be shed on my hearse be drops of holy water to bless your head."
"For now a time is come to mock at form. Harry the Fifth is crowned. Up, vanity, And to the English court assemble now, From every region, apes of idleness. Now, neighbor confines, purge you of your scum. Have you a ruffian that will swear, drink, dance, The oldest sins the newest kind of ways? Be happy, he will trouble you no more. England shall double gild his treble guilt. England shall give him office, honor, might, The muzzle of restraint, and the wild dog Shall flesh his tooth on every innocent. O my poor kingdom, sick with civil blows! When that my care could not withhold thy riots, O, thou wilt be a wilderness again, Peopled with wolves, thy old inhabitants.","Just mix me up with the forgotten dust, and give my body—which gave you life—to the worms. Fire my officers, undo my laws; for now the time has come to jeer at authority. Henry the Fifth is crowned: up with foolishness! Down with decorum! Be gone, all you wise advisers! Assemble lazy apes from every region, and make them the royal court of England! Now, you neighboring countries, get rid of your scum. Do you have a criminal who swears, drinks, dances, parties all night, robs, murders, and commits the oldest sins in the newest ways? Then be happy: that man won’t trouble you any longer. England will paint over his guilt with gold. England will give him a position, honor, power. Because Henry the Fifth has removed the barriers to anarchy: he’s taken the restraining muzzle off the dog of misbehavior, and that wild dog will sink his teeth into the flesh of every decent person. Oh my poor kingdom, sick from this civil war! When all my hard work couldn’t keep disorder at bay, what will you do when disorder becomes your caretaker? Oh, you’ll be a wilderness again, and all the wolves who lived here once will once again be your only citizens."
"O pardon me, my liege! But for my tears, The moist impediments unto my speech, Ere you with grief had spoke and I had heard The course of it so far. There is your crown, And He that wears the crown immortally Long guard it yours. If I affect it more Let me no more from this obedience rise, Which my most inward true and duteous spirit Teacheth this prostrate and exterior bending. God witness with me, when I here came in How cold it struck my heart! If I do feign, O, let me in my present wildness die","Oh forgive me, your highness. If it weren’t for these tears—which are impeding my speech—I would have stopped this harsh scolding before you, in your grief, had spoken and before I had listened so long. There’s your crown. May God, who wears the crown eternally, guard it as yours for a long time. If I care for the crown in any way other than as a symbol of your honor and reputation, let me never rise from this kneeling position. It is my deepest and most dutiful feelings which teach my body to bend and bow to you, causing my outer body to reflect my inner feelings. May God be my witness: when I came in here and saw that you weren’t breathing, my blood ran cold. If I’m lying,"
"And never live to show th' incredulous world The noble change that I have purposèd. And dead almost, my liege, to think you were, I spake unto this crown as having sense, And thus upbraided it: “The care on thee depending Hath fed upon the body of my father; Other, less fine in carat, is more precious, Preserving life in med'cine potable; But thou, most fine, most honored, most renowned, Hast eat thy bearer up.” Thus, my most royal liege, To try with it, as with an enemy That had before my face murdered my father, The quarrel of a true inheritor. But if it did infect my blood with joy If any rebel or vain spirit of mine Did with the least affection of a welcome Give entertainment to the might of it, Let God forever keep it from my head That doth with awe and terror kneel to it.","may I die as the wild youth I was before, and never live to show the dubious world the transformation I have been planning. Coming to see you, thinking you were dead—and being nearly dead myself, just thinking that you were—I spoke to this crown as though it were alive. I scolded it like this: “The worry you’ve caused has eaten my father alive. So you, the best piece of gold, are actually the worst piece of gold. Other gold, perhaps worth less, is more precious, since it at least brings us health when mixed in our drinks. But you—the best, the most honored, the most famous—have consumed the person wearing you.” And as I accused it, I put it on my head, to fight against it as an enemy who’d killed my father before my very eyes. It was the fight of a loyal child. But may God keep it from me forever—making me like the poorest servant bowing down before it in awe and terror—if it in any way made me happy or arrogant, or if any part of me was the least bit pleased to welcome it and the power it brings."
"O my son, God put it in thy mind to take it hence That thou mightst win the more thy father’s love, Come hither, Harry, sit thou by my bed And hear, I think, the very latest counsel That ever I shall breathe. God knows, my son, By what bypaths and indirect crook’d ways How troublesome it sat upon my head. To thee it shall descend with better quiet,","Oh my son, God made you take it from me so that, in pleading your case so beautifully, you would make me love you more! Come here, Harry. Sit by my bed and listen to what I think will be the last advice I ever give. God knows the unusual paths and indirect, crooked ways that led me to this crown. And I know very well how much anxiety it has caused as I’ve worn it. It will fall to you in bitter peace, with"
"Better opinion, better confirmation, For all the soil of the achievement goes But as an honor snatched with boist'rous hand, And I had many living to upbraid My gain of it by their assistances, Which daily grew to quarrel and to bloodshed, Thou see’st with peril I have answerèd, For all my reign hath been but as a scene Acting that argument. And now my death Changes the mood, for what in me was purchased So thou the garland wear’st successively. Yet though thou stand’st more sure than I could do, Thou art not firm enough, since griefs are green, And all my friends, which thou must make thy friends, By whose fell working I was first advanced And by whose power I well might lodge a fear To be again displaced; which to avoid, I cut them off and had a purpose now Lest rest and lying still might make them look Too near unto my state. Therefore, my Harry, Be it thy course to busy giddy minds With foreign quarrels; that action, hence borne out, More would I, but my lungs are wasted so That strength of speech is utterly denied me. How I came by the crown, O God forgive, And grant it may with thee in true peace live.","better support and stronger approval. The stain of its obtainment dies now, with me. On me, the crown seemed like an honor grabbed with a violent hand, and many people lived to remind me that they had helped me take it. Eventually, those daily reminders grew into war and bloodshed, doing damage to the peace. You can see how much pain it’s caused me as I’ve fought my foes. My entire reign has been like a play, in which we rehash that disagreement. Now my death changes the show. What I bought, you will inherit. You’ll wear the crown by right of succession. But even though you have a firmer claim to the crown than I had, it’s not firm enough. Anger is still fresh, and my former friends—whom you must make into your friends—have only recently been disarmed. It was their power that first got me the crown, and I feared that same power could take me down. To avoid that, I defeated their rebellion, and planned to lead an army to the Holy Land. I thought that, with nothing to occupy themselves, they’d start eyeing me and my crown. Therefore, my Harry, make it your policy to focus the distracted minds of the people with foreign wars. Military actions abroad will make people forget about troubling matters in the past. I’d say more, but my lungs are so worn out that I don’t have the strength to speak. God forgive me for how I came by the crown, and may he grant that you enjoy it in peace."
"You won it, wore it, kept it, gave it me.","My gracious lord, you won it, wore it, kept it, then gave it to me. My possession of it must therefore be honest"
"Then plain and right must my possession be, Which I with more than with a common pain 'Gainst all the world will rightfully maintain.",and lawful. And I will work as hard as I can to defend this crown against any man.
"Look, look, here comes my John of Lancaster.","Look, look, here comes my son, John of Lancaster."
"Health, peace, and happiness to my royal father.","Health, peace, and happiness to my royal father!"
"Thou bring’st me happiness and peace, son John, But health, alack, with youthful wings is flown From this bare withered trunk. Upon thy sight Where is my Lord of Warwick?","You bring me happiness and peace, John. But health, unfortunately, has flown from this shrunken body. Now that I’ve seen you, I have nothing more to do in this world. Where is Lord Warwick?"
My Lord of Warwick.,Lord Warwick!
Doth any name particular belong Unto the lodging where I first did swoon?,Does the room I first collapsed in have a name?
"'Tis called Jerusalem, my noble lord.","It’s called the Jerusalem Room, your highness."
"Laud be to God! Even there my life must end. It hath been prophesied to me many years, I should not die but in Jerusalem, Which vainly I supposed the Holy Land. In that Jerusalem shall Harry die.","Praise be to God! That’s where I must die. For years it’s been predicted that I would die in Jerusalem; I foolishly thought that meant the Holy Land. But carry me to that room, and there I’ll lie. In that Jerusalem will Harry die."
"By cock and pie, sir, you shall not away tonight.—What, Davy, I say!","By gum, sir, you will not leave tonight. Hey, Davy!"
"You must excuse me, Master Robert Shallow.","Please excuse me, Master Robert Shallow."
"I will not excuse you. You shall not be excused. Excuses shall not be excused.—Why, Davy!","I will not excuse you. You will not be excused. Excuses will not be allowed. No excuse will do. You will not be excused. Hey, Davy!"
"Here, sir.","Here, sir."
"Davy, Davy, Davy, Davy, let me see, Davy, let me see, Davy, let me see. Yea, marry, William cook, bid him come","Davy, Davy, Davy, Davy, let’s see, Davy, let’s see, Davy, let’s see. Oh yes, right: tell William the cook to come here. Sir John, you will not be excused."
"Marry, sir, thus: those precepts cannot be served. And again, sir, shall we sow the hade land with wheat?","Well sir, here’s the thing. Those warrants couldn’t be served. And once more, sir, should we plant wheat at the field’s edges?"
"With red wheat, Davy. But for William cook, are there no young pigeons?","Plant red wheat, Davy. But as for William the cook—aren’t there any young pigeons?"
irons.,"Yes, sir. Here’s the bill from the blacksmith for horseshoes and plow blades."
"Let it be cast and paid.—Sir John, you shall not be excused.","Check the figures and then and pay it. Sir John, you will not be excused."
"Now, sir, a new link to the bucket must needs be had. And, sir, do you mean to stop any of William’s wages about the","Now, sir, we need some new chain for the bucket. And sir, do you plan to dock William’s pay for the wine he lost at the Hinckley fair?"
"He shall answer it. Some pigeons, Davy, a couple of short- legged hens, a joint of mutton, and any pretty little tiny kickshaws, tell William cook.","He’ll pay for that. Some pigeons, Davy; a couple of short-legged hens, a leg of lamb, and any fun little fancy dishes. Tell William the cook."
"Doth the man of war stay all night, sir?",Is the soldier staying all night?
"Yea, Davy. I will use him well. A friend i' th' court is better arrant knaves and will backbite.","Yes, Davy. I’ll take good care of him. A friend at court is better than money in your pocket. Take good care of his men, Davy. They’re good-for-nothings, and they’ll bite you."
"No worse than they are back-bitten, sir, for they have marvellous foul linen.","No worse than they’re bitten, sir. Their clothes are full of lice."
"Well-conceited, Davy. About thy business, Davy.","Good one, Davy. Get on with your work, Davy."
against Clement Perkes o' th' hill.,"Please, sir, rule in favor of William Visor of Woncot in his lawsuit against Clement Perkes of the hill."
"There is many complaints, Davy, against that Visor. That Visor is an arrant knave, on my knowledge.","Davy, there are a lot of suits against that Visor. That Visor is a good-for-nothing, as best I can tell."
"I grant your Worship that he is a knave, sir, but yet, God friend’s request. An honest man, sir, is able to speak for himself when a knave is not. I have served your Worship truly, sir, this eight years; an if I cannot once or twice in a quarter bear out a knave against an honest man, I have","I agree with your honor that he’s a good-for-nothing, but God forbid that a good-for-nothing should be denied a favor when his friend asks for one on his behalf. An honest man can speak for himself, but a good-for-nothing can’t. I’ve worked for you for eight years, sir. If I can’t get you to rule in favor of a good-"
"honest friend, sir; therefore I beseech you let him be countenanced.","for-nothing once in a while, then obviously you don’t think very much of me. That good-for-nothing is my good friend, sir. So I ask you, please: rule in his favor."
"Go to, I say he shall have no wrong. Look about, Davy.","Stop now; I tell you he won’t be wronged. Now get going, Davy."
"Where are you, Sir John? Come, come, come, off with your","Where are you, Sir John? Come, come, come. Take your boots off. Let me shake your hand, Master Bardolph."
I am glad to see your Worship.,"I’m glad to see you, your honor."
"I thank thee with all my heart, kind Master Bardolph, (to the PAGE) and welcome, my tall fellow.—Come, Sir John.","I thank you with all my heart, Master Bardolph. (to the PAGE) Welcome, you tall fellow. Come, Sir John."
"I’ll follow you, good Master Robert Shallow.","I’ll be right behind you, Master Robert Shallow."
"Bardolph, look to our horses.","Bardolph, get our horses ready."
"If I were sawed into quantities, I should make four dozen of such bearded hermits' staves as Master Shallow. It is a wonderful thing to see the semblable coherence of his men’s spirits and his. They, by observing of him, do bear them, is turned into a justice-like servingman. Their spirits are so married in conjunction with the participation of society that they flock together in consent like so many wild geese. If I had a suit to Master Shallow, I would humor his men, I would curry with Master Shallow that no man could better command his servants. It is certain that either wise bearing or ignorant carriage is caught, as men take diseases, one of another. Therefore let men take heed of their","If I were cut into pieces, I’d make four dozen bearded broomsticks like this Master Shallow. It’s amazing to see the similarity between his men’s dispositions and his own. They watch him and behave like foolish judges, and he, by associating with them, turns into a judge-like workman. Their spirits are so closely joined by their intimate involvement, they’re like a flock of wild geese that fly in formation. If I needed a favor from Judge Shallow, I would make his men think that I’m a close friend of his. If I needed something from his men, I would flatter Shallow by telling him that no one commands servants better than he does. One thing’s for sure: the behavior of a wise man and that of an idiot are contagious, like diseases. They spread from person to person, which is why people must be careful about"
"keep Prince Harry in continual laughter the wearing out of six fashions, which is four terms, or two actions, and a' shall laugh without intervallums. O, it is much that a lie with a slight oath and a jest with a sad brow will do with a fellow that never had the ache in his shoulders. O, you shall see him laugh till his face be like a wet cloak ill laid up.","the company they keep. I’ll come up with enough material about this Shallow to keep Prince Hal laughing nonstop for a year. That’s how much time it takes for the current fashion to change six times, or for two lawsuits to be completed. He’ll laugh with no intermission. Oh, a lie told with a measure of truth—or a joke told with a serious face—will go far with a young fellow, who has never had his shoulders weighed down by old age or worries. Oh, he’ll laugh until his face looks like a wet coat that was hung poorly—it’ll be all wrinkled from laughter."
(within) Sir John.,(offstage) Sir John!
"I come, Master Shallow; I come, Master Shallow.","Coming, Master Shallow! Coming!"
"How now, my Lord Chief Justice, whither away?","What’s happening, my Lord Chief Justice? Where are you going?"
How doth the King?,How’s the King doing?
Exceeding well. His cares are now all ended.,Very well. All his worries are ended now.
"I hope, not dead.","Not dead, I hope."
"He’s walked the way of nature,","He’s gone down nature’s path; for our purposes, he is no longer living."
I would his Majesty had called me with him. The service that I truly did his life Hath left me open to all injuries.,"I wish his majesty had brought me with him. The work I did for him while he was alive makes me very vulnerable, now that he’s dead."
"Indeed, I think the young King loves you not.","Indeed, I think the young King has no love for you."
"To welcome the condition of the time, Which cannot look more hideously upon me Than I have drawn it in my fantasy.","I know he doesn’t. I’m preparing myself to deal with whatever happens, which can’t be any worse than what I’ve imagined."
Here come the heavy issue of dead Harry. Of he the worst of these three gentlemen! How many nobles then should hold their places That must strike sail to spirits of vile sort!,"Here come the heavy-hearted children of dead Harry. If only the living Harry had the character of the worst of these three young men. Then a lot of noblemen would remain secure, instead of having to step aside to make room for lowlifes."
"O God, I fear all will be overturned.",Oh God! I’m afraid everything will be turned upside-down.
"Good morrow, cousin Warwick, good morrow.","Good morning, cousin Warwick, good morning."
"Good morrow, cousin.","Good morning, cousin."
We meet like men that had forgot to speak.,We’re all like men who don’t remember how to speak.
"We do remember, but our argument Is all too heavy to admit much talk.","We remember how, but what we have to say is so sad that we cannot speak."
"Well, peace be with him that hath made us heavy.","Well, peace be with the man who has made us sad."
"Peace be with us, lest we be heavier.","Peace be with us, or else we’ll be even sadder!"
"O, good my lord, you have lost a friend indeed, And I dare swear you borrow not that face Of seeming sorrow; it is sure your own.","Oh, my good lord, you’ve lost a friend, indeed. I’m sure you’re not borrowing that sorrowful face; it’s certainly your own."
You stand in coldest expectation. I am the sorrier; would ’twere otherwise.,"Even though no man can know what blessings will come his way, he must expect the worst. I am sorry; I wish it were otherwise."
"Well, you must now speak Sir John Falstaff fair, Which swims against your stream of quality.","Well, now you are only allowed to speak well of Sir John Falstaff, which goes against the nature of a man of your quality."
"Led by th' impartial conduct of my soul; And never shall you see that I will beg A ragged and forestalled remission. If truth and upright innocency fail me, And tell him who hath sent me after him.","Sweet princes, what I did, I did honorably, impartially, and with a clear conscience. You won’t see me begging vilely for a pardon, which is sure to be withdrawn as soon as it is given. If truth and honest innocence don’t help me, then I’ll join my dead King and tell him who sent me."
Here comes the Prince.,Here comes the Prince.
"Good morrow, and God save your Majesty.","Good morning, and God save your majesty!"
"This new and gorgeous garment majesty Brothers, you mix your sadness with some fear. This is the English, not the Turkish court; Not Amurath an Amurath succeeds, But Harry Harry. Yet be sad, good brothers, Sorrow so royally in you appears That I will deeply put the fashion on And wear it in my heart. Why then, be sad. But entertain no more of it, good brothers, For me, by heaven, I bid you be assured, I’ll be your father and your brother too. Let me but bear your love, I ’ll bear your cares. Yet weep that Harry’s dead, and so will I, By number into hours of happiness.","This new and gorgeous robe of majesty doesn’t fit me as comfortably as you think. Brothers, your sadness is mixed with fear. This is the English court, not the Turkish one. I’m not Amurath, who had his brothers killed when he inherited his father King Amurath’s crown; I’m a Harry, following another Harry. But be sad, brothers, because truly, it suits you. You look so regal in your sorrow that I will solemnly put it on as well, and wear it in my heart. Be sad, but don’t let it be anything more than a burden we all share jointly. I want you to rest assured that as far as I’m concerned, I’ll be both your father and your brother now. Just trust me with your love, and you can trust me to care for you. Keep weeping for Harry, who is dead; I will, as well. But one Harry still lives, and he will convert those tears one by one into hours of happiness."
We hope no otherwise from your Majesty.,We hope that’s exactly what you’ll do.
"You all look strangely on me. (to the CHIEF JUSTICE) And you most. You are, I think, assured I love you not.","You’re all looking at me strangely. (to the CHIEF JUSTICE) You, most of all. I think you’re certain that I don’t love you."
Your Majesty hath no just cause to hate me.,"I’m certain that, if my actions are fairly considered, your majesty will find no just reason to hate me."
No? How might a prince of my great hopes forget So great indignities you laid upon me? Th' immediate heir of England? Was this easy? May this be washed in Lethe and forgotten?,"No? How can a great prince like me forget the terrible wrongs you did me? What were you thinking, to scold, punish, and violently imprison the heir to the English throne? Was this nothing? Should this be dipped in the river of forgetfulness and simply ignored?"
"I then did use the person of your father; The image of his power lay then in me. Whiles I was busy for the commonwealth, Your Highness pleasèd to forget my place, The majesty and power of law and justice, The image of the King whom I presented, Whereon, as an offender to your father, I gave bold way to my authority And did commit you. If the deed were ill, Be you contented, wearing now the garland, To pluck down justice from your awful bench? To trip the course of law and blunt the sword That guards the peace and safety of your person? Nay more, to spurn at your most royal image Question your royal thoughts, make the case yours; Be now the father and propose a son, Hear your own dignity so much profaned, See your most dreadful laws so loosely slighted, And then imagine me taking your part And in your power soft silencing your son. After this cold considerance, sentence me, And, as you are a king, speak in your state","I acted with the authority of your father, whose power was vested in me. And when it came to the law—which I was busy enforcing, for the good of the country—you chose to ignore my rank, and the majesty and power of law and justice which I bore as a representative of the King. You struck me in the head, the very location of my judgment. With that action, you committed a crime against your father’s own laws. So I did what my power demanded, and imprisoned you. If that was wrong, then—now that you wear the crown—I hope you’ll someday be satisfied with a son who mocks your laws, who scorns the judges who rule in your authority, who disrupts the course of law, and blunts the swords that guard your personal peace and safety. No, even worse than that: a son who disrespects your deputies, and the officers you appoint in your name. Question yourself, 								and imagine being in your father’s position. Be a father, and imagine a son. Listen to your own dignity being profaned. 								Watch as your most solemn laws are laughed at so lightly. Behold yourself being so disdained by a son. And then imagine that I 								take your side, and that in your name I gently silence your son. Soberly consider this, and then pronounce my sentence. 								As king, tell me"
"My person, or my liege’s sovereignty.","what I have done that was so unseemly for my station, myself, or my king’s authority."
"You are right, justice, and you weigh this well. Therefore still bear the balance and the sword. And I do wish your honors may increase Offend you and obey you as I did. So shall I live to speak my father’s words: “Happy am I that have a man so bold That dares do justice on my proper son; That would deliver up his greatness so Into the hands of justice.” You did commit me, For which I do commit into your hand Th' unstainèd sword that you have used to bear, With the like bold, just, and impartial spirit As you have done 'gainst me. There is my hand. You shall be as a father to my youth, My voice shall sound as you do prompt mine ear, To your well-practiced wise directions.— And, princes all, believe me, I beseech you: My father is gone wild into his grave, For in his tomb lie my affections, To mock the expectation of the world, To frustrate prophecies, and to raze out Rotten opinion, who hath writ me down After my seeming. The tide of blood in me Now doth it turn and ebb back to the sea, Where it shall mingle with the state of floods And flow henceforth in formal majesty. Now call we our high court of parliament,","You’re right, Chief Justice, and you have considered this well. Therefore, keep your position as judge and enforcer. I hope that your honors increase, and that you live to see a son of mine offend and then obey you, as I have. I will live to speak my father’s words: “I am a happy man, to have a man brave enough to punish my own son; and I’m no less happy to have a son that would surrender his greatness, and put himself in the hands of the law.” You imprisoned me, and for that I charge you to continue in my service, with this reminder: you must always be as courageous, just, and impartial as you were with me. Shake my hand. You’ll be like a father to me, and I will say whatever it is you whisper in my ear. I will bow to you, and keep myself humble in the face of your wisdom and experience. And princes, believe me, please: my father lies wild in his grave, for he took my recklessness with him when he died. His sober spirit survives in me, and I will flout the world’s expectations. I will prove their prophecies false, and flush out the rotten opinions of those who judged me based on what I once seemed to be. My behavior, the tide of my blood, used to flow proudly and vainly. But now, it ebbs and turns back toward the sea, where it will mingle with the ocean’s majesty and flow back through my body with formal dignity. Now I will assemble my parliament, and choose such noble officers and advisors that our great country will be able to march alongside the best governed nations. We’ll become acquainted and familiar"
"That the great body of our state may go In equal rank with the best governed nation; That war, or peace, or both at once, may be As things acquainted and familiar to us, Our coronation done, we will accite, As I before remembered, all our state. And, God consigning to my good intents, No prince nor peer shall have just cause to say","with the states of war, peace, or both at once; in this, Chief Justice, my new father, you will be my closest advisor. Once my coronation has been completed, I will, as I said before, summon all the nobility. And if God endorses my good intentions, no prince or lord will have reason to say that he wishes God would shorten my happy life by even a single day."
"Nay, you shall see my orchard, where, in an arbor, we will eat a last year’s pippin of my own graffing, with a dish of caraways, and so forth.—Come, cousin Silence.—And then to bed.","No, you’re going to see my orchard. We’ll sit in an arbor and eat some of the pippin apples I cross-bred last season, along with some caraway seeds and so on. Come on, Silence. Then we’ll go to bed."
"Fore God, you have here a goodly dwelling and a rich.","I swear, you have a good-looking place here, and it’s fancy."
"Barren, barren, barren, beggars all, beggars all, Sir John. Marry, good air.—Spread, Davy, spread, Davy. Well said, Davy.","Cheap, cheap, cheap. We’re broke, broke, Sir John. But one thing we do have is good air. Set the table, Davy, set the table. Good job, Davy."
This Davy serves you for good uses. He is your servingman,This Davy does a lot for you. He’s your right-hand man as well as your steward.
"A good varlet, a good varlet, a very good varlet, Sir John. By the Mass, I have drunk too much sack at supper. A good varlet. Now sit down, now sit down.—Come, cousin.","A good servant, a very good servant, Sir John. By God, I had too much wine with dinner. A good servant. Now sit down, sit down. Come on, cousin."
"Ah, sirrah, quoth he, we shall (sings) And praise God for the merry year, When flesh is cheap and females dear, And lusty lads roam here and there So merrily,","Ah, Sirrah, he said. We will: Do nothing but eat and celebrate, (sings) And praise God for this happy year, When flesh is cheap but women are costly, And lusty men roam here and there, So merrily, And always so merrily."
"There’s a merry heart!—Good Master Silence, I’ll give you a health for that anon.","That’s a merry heart! Master Silence, I’ll drink a toast to you in a minute."
"Give Master Bardolph some wine, Davy.","Davy, get Master Bardolph some wine."
"Sweet sir, sit. I’ll be with you anon. Most sweet sir, sit. in meat, we’ll have in drink, but you must bear. The heart’s all.","Sit, kind sir; I’ll be with you in a second. Very kind sir, please sit. Here’s to you! What we lack in food, we make up for in drink. You must endure it; good intentions are what count."
"Be merry, Master Bardolph. —And, my little soldier there, be merry.","Enjoy yourself, Master Bardolph, and you, my little soldier, enjoy yourself."
"For women are shrews, both short and tall. 'Tis merry in hall when beards wag all, And welcome merry Shrovetide. Be merry, be merry.","(sings) Enjoy, enjoy! My wife has it all, Women are shrews, whether they’re short or they’re tall, It’s a merry party when men laugh and joke, So let’s enjoy ourselves this Shrovetide Shrovetide = the period of merrymaking before the Christian season of Lent (a time of penance and self-denial) Shrovetide , Enjoy, enjoy!"
I did not think Master Silence had been a man of this mettle.,I didn’t think Master Silence had this in him.
"Who, I? I have been merry twice and once ere now.","Who, me? I’ve let loose once or twice in my life."
(to BARDOLPH) There’s a dish of leather-coats for you.,(to BARDOLPH) Here’s a dish of red apples for you.
Davy!,Davy!
"Your Worship, I’ll be with you straight.—","Yes, sir! I’ll be with you in a second. (to BARDOLPH) A cup of wine, sir?"
"(sings) A cup of wine that’s brisk and fine, And drink unto thee, leman mine, And a merry heart lives long-a.","(sings) A cup of wine that’s fresh and fine, And drink to you, darling mine, And a happy heart lives long!"
"Well said, Master Silence.","Well said, Master Silence."
And we shall be merry; now comes in the sweet o' th' night.,And we will enjoy ourselves. Now’s the best time of night.
"Health and long life to you, Master Silence.","Here’s to your health and long life, Master Silence."
"(sings) Fill the cup, and let it come, I’ll pledge you a mile to th' bottom.","(sings) Fill the cup, and pass it here, I’ll drink it to the bottom, even if it’s a mile down."
"Honest Bardolph, welcome. If thou wantest anything and wilt not call, beshrew thy heart.— indeed too. I’ll drink to Master Bardolph, and to all the cabileros about London.","Welcome, honest Master Bardolph. If you want something and don’t ask for it, that’s your tough luck. (to the PAGE) Welcome, my little tiny thief, welcome indeed. I’ll drink to Master Bardolph, and to all the good sports around London."
I hope to see London once ere I die.,I hope to see London once before I die.
"An I might see you there, Davy!","If I see you there, Davy—"
Master Bardolph?,"By God, you’ll break open a quart bottle together, ha! Won’t you, Master Bardolph?"
"Yea, sir, in a pottle-pot.","Yessir, in a two-quart glass."
"By God’s liggens, I thank thee. The knave will stick by thee, I can assure thee that. He will not out, he. 'Tis true bred!","By God’s fingers, I thank you. This rogue will stick with you, I promise you that. He won’t fail, he’s true blue."
"And I’ll stick by him, sir.","And I’ll stick with him, sir."
"Why, there spoke a king. Lack nothing, be merry. One knocks at the door within Look who’s at door there, ho. Who knocks?","Spoken like a king. Take whatever you want: enjoy yourselves! Knocking is heard offstage. Hey, see who’s at the door there! Who’s knocking?"
"(to SILENCE) Why, now you have done me right.",(to SILENCE) You’re really keeping up with me!
"And dub me knight, Samingo. Is ’t not so?","(sings) Keep up with me, Then dub me a knight! Samingo Samingo = lyric from “Monsieur Mingo,” a drinking song. In Latin, mingo means “I urinate.” Samingo ! Right?"
'Tis so.,Right.
"Is ’t so? Why then, say an old man can do somewhat.",Right? Then you’ve got to admit that an old man can do some things.
"An ’t please your Worship, there’s one Pistol come from the court with news.","Sir, if I may say so, there’s someone named Pistol here from the royal court. He’s got news."
From the court? Let him come in.,From the royal court? Let him in.
"How now, Pistol?","What’s up, Pistol!"
"Sir John, God save you.","God save you, Sir John."
"What wind blew you hither, Pistol?","What wind blew you here, Pistol?"
"Not the ill wind which blows no man to good. Sweet knight, thou art now one of the greatest men in this realm.","Not the evil wind that blows no one toward any good. Sweet knight, you are now one of the hugest men in the country."
"By 'r Lady, I think he be, but Goodman Puff of Barson.","I swear, I think he is—except for the good fellow Puff, from Barson."
"Puff? Sir John, I am thy Pistol and thy friend, And helter-skelter have I rode to thee, And tidings do I bring, and lucky joys, And golden times, and happy news of price.","Puff? Puff in your face, you degenerate coward! Sir John, I’m your Pistol and your friend, and I rode at full tilt to find you here. I bring you reports, and good luck, and golden times, and happy, valuable news."
"I pray thee now, deliver them like a man of this world.","Then please, deliver this news like a human being who lives in this world."
A foutre for the world and worldlings base! I speak of Africa and golden joys.,"Damn this world, and the vile little people who live in it! I’m talking about Africa, and its golden joys."
"O base Assyrian knight, what is thy news? Let King Cophetua know the truth thereof.","Oh, you vulgar Assyrian knight, what is your news? Convey to King Cophetua Falstaff is aping Pistol’s high-flown style. Cophetua was an African king who married a beggar. King Cophetua the story therein."
"(sings) And Robin Hood, Scarlet, and John.","(sings) And Robin Hood, Scarlet, and John a lyric from a popular song And Robin Hood, Scarlet, and John ."
"Shall dunghill curs confront the Helicons, And shall good news be baffled? Then, Pistol, lay thy head in Furies' lap.","Will junkyard dogs attack the Muses, goddesses of poetry? Will my good news be thwarted this way? Then Pistol, go ahead and plead with the Furies, the goddesses of revenge."
"Honest gentleman, I know not your breeding.","Honest gentleman, I don’t know what kind of family you’re from."
"Why then, lament therefor.",That’s your loss.
"Give me pardon, sir. If, sir, you come with news from the court, I take it there’s but two ways, either to utter them, or to conceal them. I am, sir, under the King in some authority.","Forgive me saying so, sir, but if you’ve got news from the court, then you have only two choices: you can either tell it or not tell it. I have some authority from the King, you know."
"Under which king, besonian? Speak or die.","From which king, you beggar? Speak, or die."
Under King Harry.,For King Henry.
"Harry the Fourth, or Fifth?","Henry the Fourth, or Fifth?"
Harry the Fourth.,Henry the Fourth.
"A foutre for thine office!— Sir John, thy tender lambkin now is king. When Pistol lies, do this (he makes an obscene gesture) and fig me, like The bragging Spaniard.","Then screw your position! Sir John, your tender little lamb is now the king. Henry the Fifth’s the man, and I speak the truth. When Pistol tells a lie, do this (he makes an obscene gesture) and tell me to go screw myself, like some crazy Spaniard."
"What, is the old king dead?",What? Is the old King dead?
As nail in door. The things I speak are just.,As a doornail: these things I say are true.
"Shallow, choose what office thou wilt in the land, ’tis thine. Pistol, I will double-charge thee with dignities.","Get going, Bardolph! Saddle up my horse. Master Robert Shallow, pick whatever job you want in the whole country: it’s yours. Pistol, I’ll pile honors on you."
O joyful day! I would not take a knighthood for my fortune.,"Oh happy day! I wouldn’t even trade a knighthood for my new, good fortune."
"What, I do bring good news!",There you go! I brought good news!
"Shallow, be what thou wilt. I am Fortune’s steward. Get on",Carry Master Silence to bed. Master Shallow—Lord Shallow—call yourself whatever you want. I’m in
"thy boots. We’ll ride all night.—O sweet Pistol!—Away, Bardolph!","charge of all the luck in the world! Get your boots on. We’ll ride through the night. Oh sweet Pistol! Get going, Bardolph!"
"Come, Pistol, utter more to me, and withal devise something young King is sick for me. Let us take any man’s horses. The laws of England are at my commandment. Blessed are they that have been my friends, and woe to my Lord Chief Justice!","Pistol, tell me more, and help me think of something good we can do for you. Boots, boots, Master Shallow! I know the young King is dying to see me. Let’s just take anybody’s horses; I rule the laws of England now! Blessed are those who have been my friends, and watch out, Lord Chief Justice!"
"“Where is the life that late I led?” say they. Why, here it is. Welcome these pleasant days.","May vultures eat out his lungs, too! You know the old saying, “What happened to the life I used to lead?” Well, they’re here; welcome to these pleasant days."
"No, thou arrant knave. I would to God that I might die, that I might have thee hanged. Thou hast drawn my shoulder out of joint.","No, you horrible rogue! I wish to God I were dead, so I could have you hanged. You dislocated my shoulder!"
"The Constables have delivered her over to me, and she shall a man or two lately killed about her.","The street cops handed her over to me, and she’ll be whipped through and through, I promise. She’s been involved in a couple of murders."
"Nut-hook, nut-hook, you lie! Come on, I ’ll tell thee what, thou damned tripe-visaged rascal: an the child I now go with do miscarry, thou wert better thou hadst struck thy mother,","Pig, Pig! You lie! Come on! I’ll tell you what, you damned flabby-faced moron: if I have a miscarriage now, you’ll wish you’d hit your own mother, you pasty-faced villain!"
"O the Lord, that Sir John were come! I would make this a bloody day to somebody. But I pray God the fruit of her womb might miscarry.","Oh God, I wish Sir John would come! He’d make somebody bleed for this. I pray to God that she has a miscarriage!"
"If it do, you shall have a dozen of cushions again; you have man is dead that you and Pistol beat amongst you.","Well, if she does, you’ll have twelve cushions on your couch again. You have only eleven now, since she’s wearing one of them under her dress. I order both of you to come with me: the man that you two and Pistol beat up is dead."
"I’ll tell you what, you thin man in a censer, I will have you as soundly swinged for this, you bluebottle rogue, you filthy famished correctioner. If you be not swinged, I’ll forswear","I’ll tell you what, you stick-figure; I’ll have you beaten soundly for this. You blue-coated rogue, you filthy, starving correctioner! If you aren’t walloped for this, I’ll swear off skirts."
"Come, come, you she knight-errant, come.","Come on, come on, you little night sinner, come on."
"O God, that right should thus overcome might! Well, of sufferance comes ease.","Oh God! I can’t believe that right is overcoming might! Well, challenges build character."
"Come, you rogue, come, bring me to a justice.","Come on, you bastard, come on. Bring me to a judge."
"Ay, come, you starved bloodhound.","Yeah, come on, you starved dog."
"Goodman Death, Goodman Bones!",Master Death! Master Bones!
"Thou atomy, thou!","You skeleton, you!"
"Come, you thin thing, come, you rascal.","Come on, you thin thing; come on, you lean deer!"
Very well.,Very well.
"More rushes, more rushes.",More rushes; more rushes.
The trumpets have sounded twice.,The trumpets have blown twice.
"'Twill be two o'clock ere they come from the coronation. Dispatch, dispatch.","It’ll be two o'clock before they arrive from the coronation. Hurry, hurry."
"King do you grace. I will leer upon him as he comes by, and do but mark the countenance that he will give me.","Stand here near me, Master Robert Shallow. I’ll make the King do good things for you: I’ll throw him a look as he passes by. Just watch the face he’ll make at me."
"God bless thy lungs, good knight!","God bless your lungs, good knight."
"Come here, Pistol, stand behind me.—(to SHALLOW) O, if I bestowed the thousand pound I borrowed of you. But ’tis no matter. This poor show doth better. This doth infer the zeal I had to see him.","Come here, Pistol. Stand behind me. (to SHALLOW) Oh, if I’d had time to make new clothes I would have spent the thousand pounds I borrowed from you. But it doesn’t matter. These poor clothes are better; it shows how desperate I was to see him."
It doth so.,It does indeed.
It shows my earnestness of affection—,It shows how sincerely I love him—
It doth so.,It does indeed.
My devotion—,My devotion—
"It doth, it doth, it doth.","It does, it does, it does."
"As it were, to ride day and night, and not to deliberate, not","In a word, to ride all night; not to stop and think, not to dawdle, not to take the time to change my clothes—"
"It is best, certain.","It is best, no doubt about it."
"But to stand stained with travel and sweating with desire to see him, thinking of nothing else, putting all affairs else in oblivion, as if there were nothing else to be done but to see","Standing here filthy from traveling, and sweating with my desire to see him; thinking of nothing else, disregarding everything, as if the only thing in the world that mattered was seeing him."
"'Tis semper idem, for obsque hoc nihil est; ’tis all in every part.","That’s how it is. Nothing else matters. Semper idem. Obsque hoc nihil est These Latin phrases translate as “Ever the same” and “Apart from this, there is nothing.” Semper idem. Obsque hoc nihil est ."
'Tis so indeed.,That’s exactly right.
"My knight, I will inflame thy noble liver, and make thee durance and contagious prison, Haled thither by most mechanical and dirty hand. Rouse up revenge from ebon den with fell Alecto’s snake, for Doll is in. Pistol speaks nought but truth.","Knight, I’ll fire up your noble liver and make you enraged. Doll, the goddess of your thoughts, is imprisoned in a horrible jail, tossed there by a heartless and filthy hand. Stoke up dark revenge from your deepest belly and set loose the serpents of hell. Doll is in. Pistol speaks nothing but the truth."
I will deliver her.,I’ll set her free.
"There roared the sea, and trumpet-clangor sounds.",That was the roar of the sea. The clanging trumpet sounds!
"God save thy Grace, King Hal, my royal Hal.","God save your grace, King Hal! My royal Hal!"
"The heavens thee guard and keep, most royal imp of fame!","The heavens guard and protect you, you royal child of fame!"
"God save thee, my sweet boy!","God save you, my sweet boy!"
"My Lord Chief Justice, speak to that vain man.","My Lord Chief Justice, go speak to that arrogant man."
(to FALSTAFF) Have you your wits? Know you what ’tis to speak?,"(to FALSTAFF) Have you lost your mind? Do you know what you’re doing, talking like that?"
"My King, my Jove, I speak to thee, my heart!","My King! My God! I’m talking to you, my heart!"
"I know thee not, old man. Fall to thy prayers. How ill white hairs become a fool and jester. So surfeit-swelled, so old, and so profane; But being awaked, I do despise my dream. Make less thy body hence, and more thy grace; Leave gormandizing. Know the grave doth gape Reply not to me with a fool-born jest. Presume not that I am the thing I was, For God doth know—so shall the world perceive— That I have turned away my former self. When thou dost hear I am as I have been, Approach me, and thou shalt be as thou wast, The tutor and the feeder of my riots. Till then I banish thee, on pain of death,","I know you not, old man. Get down on your knees and pray, for white hair doesn’t sit well on a fool and a clown. I have dreamed about such a man for a long time: a man so swollen with excess, so old and so obscene. But now that I have awakened, I despise that dream. Let your body lessen, and your manners increase; leave behind your overindulgence, and know that the grave gapes three times as wide for you than any other man. Don’t answer me with a foolish joke. Do not assume that I am what I was; for God knows, I have turned my back on my former self, and I will do the same to those who were my companions. When you hear that I am as I was, then come to me, and you will once again be what you were: the teacher and nurse to my wild, riotous ways. Until then, I banish you, on pain of death, as I have done to the other men who once misled me. Do not"
"Not to come near our person by ten mile. For competence of life I will allow you, That lack of means enforce you not to evils. And, as we hear you do reform yourselves, Give you advancement. (to CHIEF JUSTICE) Be it your charge, my lord, To see performed the tenor of my word.— Set on.","come within ten miles of me. I’ll grant you a modest allowance to live on, so that poverty will not lead you into evil. When I hear that you have reformed your ways, I will promote you as you deserve. (to CHIEF JUSTICE) It’s your job to see this order carried out. Let’s go."
"Master Shallow, I owe you a thousand pound.","Master Shallow, I owe you a thousand pounds."
home with me.,"Yes, indeed, Sir John. And I’d like to take it home with me."
"That can hardly be, Master Shallow. Do not you grieve at this. I shall be sent for in private to him. Look you, he must seem thus to the world. Fear not your advancements. I will","That can’t happen, Master Shallow. Don’t let this upset you; I’ll get a private invitation to see him. Look, he has to appear this way to the world. Don’t worry about your good fortunes: I’m still the man who will make you great."
"I cannot well perceive how, unless you should give me your doublet and stuff me out with straw. I beseech you, good Sir John, let me have five hundred of my thousand.","I don’t know how you’re going to do that, unless you give me your jacket and fill me out with stuffing. Please, Sir John, let me have five hundred of my thousand."
"Sir, I will be as good as my word. This that you heard was","Sir, I’m as good as my word. What you heard here a minute ago was just a color; it was a pretense."
"A color that I fear you will die in, Sir John.","A color that I fear you’ll be buried in, Sir John."
"Fear no colors. Go with me to dinner.—Come, Lieutenant Pistol.—Come, Bardolph.—I shall be sent for soon at night.","Stop worrying about colors: come to lunch with me. Come, Lieutenant Pistol. Come, Bardolph. He’ll call for me tonight."
"Go, carry Sir John Falstaff to the Fleet.","Go, take Sir John Falstaff away to jail, and take all his companions with him."
"My lord, my lord—","My lord, my lord—"
I cannot now speak. I will hear you soon.— Take them away.,I can’t talk now. I’ll listen to you later. Take them away.
"Si fortune me tormenta, spero me contenta.","Si fortuna me tormenta, spero me contenta “If fortune torments me, hope contents me.” Pistol’s motto is a garbled mix of French, Spanish and Italian. Si fortuna me tormenta, spero me contenta ."
"He hath intent his wonted followers Shall all be very well provided for, But all are banished till their conversations Appear more wise and modest to the world.","The King’s fair dealings please me. He wants to ensure that his old companions are provided for, but he banishes them until they can behave more properly and presentably."
And so they are.,That they are.
"The King hath called his parliament, my lord.","The King’s assembled his parliament, sir."
He hath.,He has.
"I will lay odds that, ere this year expire, We bear our civil swords and native fire Whose music, to my thinking, pleased the King. Come, will you hence?","I’ll bet that, before the year ends, we’ll launch an invasion of France. I heard a little bird singing about it, and I think the music pleased the King. Come, will you leave with me?"
"First my fear; then my curtsy, last my speech. My fear is your displeasure my curtsy my duty; and my speech, to beg your for what I have to say is of mine own making, and what indeed I should say will, I doubt, prove mine own marring. But to the purpose, and so to the venture. Be it known to you, as it is very well, I was lately here in the end of a displeasing I meant indeed to pay you with this, which, if like an ill venture it come unluckily home, I break, and you, my gentle creditors, lose. Here I promised you I would be, and here I commit my body to your mercies. Bate me some, and I will infinitely. And so I kneel down before you, but, indeed, to pray for the Queen. If my tongue cannot entreat you to acquit me, will you command me to use my legs? And yet that were but light will make any possible satisfaction, and so would I. All the gentlewomen here have forgiven me; if the gentlemen will not, then the gentlemen do not agree with the gentlewomen, which was never seen before in such an assembly. cloyed with fat meat, our humble author will continue the story, with Sir John in it, and make you merry with fair Katherine of France, where, for anything I know, Falstaff shall die of a sweat, unless already he be killed with your the man. My tongue is weary; when my legs are too, I will bid you good night.","First, I’ll tell you what I’m afraid of. Then, I’ll bow, and finally, I’ll make a speech. I fear that this play displeased you; I bow to you out of duty; and finally, I make this speech to ask you for forgiveness. If you’re expecting a good speech now, then I’m in trouble. For I wrote the words I’m about to say, and I’m sure that what I’m about to say will end up getting me in trouble. But I’ll get to the point, and thus I’ll get to the danger. You should know—as you seem to—that I recently came on this stage at the end of some other lousy play, to ask you to be patient and to promise you a better play the next time. I had intended to pay you back for that play with this one. If you didn’t like this play, then—like a businessman who has gambled on a risky venture—I am bankrupt; and you, my sweet creditors, are out of luck. I promised you I would be here, and here I stand to submit myself to your mercy. Give me some mercy and I’ll promise to pay you back again another time. That’s how debtors do it: they always promise to repay. If my talking can’t convince you to let me off the hook, then would you like me to dance? And yet, that would be a cheap payment, to dance myself out of debt. But a person with a good conscience will always seek to pay his debts, and I would do the same. All the women here have forgiven me: if the men won’t, then the men don’t agree with the women, which has never happened in a theater audience before. Just one more thing, if you don’t mind. If fatty meat hasn’t clogged you up yet, our playwright will continue the story with Sir John in it, and entertain you with the beautiful Princess Katharine of France. And speaking of France, as far as I know, Falstaff will die there of the sweating disease—unless, that is, he’s already been killed by your low opinions of him. Oldcastle In an early version of Henry IV, the character of Falstaff was called Sir John Oldcastle. The name was changed upon the insistence of the historical Sir John Oldcastle’s descendants, who were highly influential in England at the time. Oldcastle died a martyr, and this is not him. My mouth is tired; when my legs are, too, I’ll say goodnight and take a bow."
