"Hence! Home, you idle creatures get you home! Is this a holiday? What, know you not, Being mechanical, you ought not walk Upon a laboring day without the sign","Get out of here! Go home, you lazy men. What, is today a holiday? Don’t you know that working men aren’t supposed to walk around on a workday without wearing their work clothes? You there, speak up. What’s your occupation?"
"Why, sir, a carpenter.","I’m a carpenter, sir."
"Where is thy leather apron and thy rule? What dost thou with thy best apparel on? —You, sir, what trade are you?","Where are your leather apron and your ruler? What are you doing, wearing your best clothes? And you, sir, what’s your trade?"
"Truly, sir, in respect of a fine workman, I am but, as you would say, a cobbler.","Well, compared to a fine workman, you might call me a mere cobbler."
But what trade art thou? Answer me directly.,But what’s your trade? Answer me straightforwardly.
"A trade, sir, that I hope I may use with a safe conscience, which is, indeed, sir, a mender of bad soles.","It is a trade, sir, that I practice with a clear conscience. I am a mender of worn soles."
"What trade, thou knave? Thou naughty knave, what trade?","What trade, boy? You insolent rascal, what trade?"
"Nay, I beseech you, sir, be not out with me. Yet, if you be out, sir, I can mend you.","Sir, please, don’t be angry. But if your soles are worn out, I can mend you."
"What mean’st thou by that? “Mend” me, thou saucy fellow?","What do you mean by that? “Mend” me, you impertinent fellow?!"
"Why, sir, cobble you.","Cobble you, sir."
"Thou art a cobbler, art thou?","You’re a cobbler, are you?"
"Truly, sir, all that I live by is with the awl. I meddle with no tradesman’s matters nor women’s matters, but withal I am indeed, sir, a surgeon to old shoes. When they are in great danger, I recover them. As proper men as ever trod upon neat’s leather have gone upon my handiwork.","Sir, I make my living using an awl. I stick to my work; I don’t meddle in politics or chase women. I’m a surgeon to old shoes. When they’re endangered, I save them. The noblest men who ever walked on leather have walked on my handiwork."
But wherefore art not in thy shop today? Why dost thou lead these men about the streets?,But why aren’t you in your shop today? Why are you leading these men through the streets?
"Truly, sir, to wear out their shoes to get myself into more work. But indeed, sir, we make holiday to see Caesar and to rejoice in his triumph.","Well, to wear out their shoes and get myself more work. Seriously, though, we took the day off to see Caesar, sir, and celebrate his triumph."
"Wherefore rejoice? What conquest brings he home? What tributaries follow him to Rome To grace in captive bonds his chariot wheels? O you hard hearts, you cruèl men of Rome, Knew you not Pompey? Many a time and oft Have you climbed up to walls and battlements, To towers and windows, yea, to chimney tops, The livelong day with patient expectation To see great Pompey pass the streets of Rome. And when you saw his chariot but appear, Have you not made an universal shout To hear the replication of your sounds Made in her concave shores? And do you now put on your best attire? And do you now cull out a holiday?","Why would you celebrate it? What victory does he bring home? What foreign lands has he conquered and captive foreigners chained to his chariot wheels? You blockheads, you unfeeling men! You hard hearts, you cruel men of Rome, didn’t you know Pompey Caesar has just conquered the sons of his deceased enemy Pompey. He as won in a civil war, not a foreign conquest. Pompey ? Many times you climbed up on walls and battlements, towers and windows—even chimney tops—with your babies in your arms, and sat there patiently all day waiting to see great Pompey ride through the streets of Rome. And when you caught a glimpse of his chariot, didn’t you shout so loud that the river Tiber shook as it echoed? And now you put on your best clothes? And now you take a holiday?"
"That comes in triumph over Pompey’s blood? Be gone! Run to your houses, fall upon your knees, Pray to the gods to intermit the plague","And now you toss flowers in the path of Caesar, who comes in triumph over Pompey’s defeated sons? Go home! Run to your houses, fall on your knees, and pray to the gods to spare you the pain that you deserve for such ingratitude."
"Go, go, good countrymen, and for this fault, Assemble all the poor men of your sort, Draw them to Tiber banks, and weep your tears Into the channel till the lowest stream","Go, go, good countrymen, and to make up for having done wrong, gather up all the poor men like yourselves, lead them to the Tiber, and weep into the river until it overflows its banks."
See whether their basest metal be not moved. They vanish tongue-tied in their guiltiness. Go you down that way towards the Capitol. This way will I. Disrobe the images,"Well, that ought to move even the most thickheaded of them. There they go, feeling so guilty they’re now tongue-tied—they don’t have a thing to say. You go down toward the Capitol, and I’ll go this way. Undress the statues if they’re decorated in honor of Caesar."
May we do so? You know it is the feast of Lupercal.,Can we do that? You know it’s the feast of Lupercal The feast of Lupercal is an annual celebration to honor the Roman god Lupercus (called Pan in Greek mythology). Lupercal .
"It is no matter. Let no images Be hung with Caesar’s trophies. I’ll about So do you too, where you perceive them thick. These growing feathers plucked from Caesar’s wing Will make him fly an ordinary pitch, Who else would soar above the view of men","It doesn’t matter. Make sure that none of the statues are decorated in tribute to Caesar. I’ll walk around and force the commoners off the streets. You do the same, wherever the crowds are thick. If we take away Caesar’s support, he’ll have to come back down to earth; otherwise, he’ll fly too high and keep the rest of us in a state of fear and obedience."
Calphurnia!,Calphurnia!
"Peace, ho! Caesar speaks.",Quiet! Caesar’s talking.
Calphurnia!,Calphurnia!
"Here, my lord.","I’m here, my lord."
When he doth run his course.—Antonius!,Stand right in Antonius’s path when he runs the race. Antonius!
"Caesar, my lord.","Yes, Caesar?"
"Forget not in your speed, Antonius, To touch Calphurnia, for our elders say Shake off their sterile curse.","Antonius, after you take off, don’t forget to touch Calphurnia, because our wise elders say that if you touch an infertile woman during this holy race, she’ll be freed from the curse of sterility."
"I shall remember. When Caesar says, “do this,” it is performed.","I’ll remember. When Caesar says “do this,” it is done."
"Set on, and leave no ceremony out.","Continue, then, and don’t forget to perform all of the rituals."
Caesar!,Caesar!
Ha! Who calls?,Who’s calling me?
Bid every noise be still. Peace yet again.,"Quiet, everyone! Quiet!"
"Who is it in the press that calls on me? I hear a tongue, shriller than all the music, Cry “Caesar!”—Speak. Caesar is turned to hear.",Who in the crowd is calling me? I hear a voice more piercing than the music of these trumpets calling “Caesar!” Speak. Caesar is listening.
Beware the ides of March.,Beware of March th.
What man is that?,Who’s that?
A soothsayer bids you beware the ides of March.,A soothsayer tells you to beware of March th.
Set him before me. Let me see his face.,Bring him in front of me. Let me see his face.
"Fellow, come from the throng. Look upon Caesar.","You, fellow, step out of the crowd. This is Caesar you’re looking at."
What sayst thou to me now? Speak once again.,What do you have to say to me now? Speak once again.
Beware the ides of March.,Beware of March th.
He is a dreamer. Let us leave him. Pass!,He’s insane. Let’s leave him. Let’s move.
Will you go see the order of the course?,Are you going to watch the race?
Not I.,Not me.
"I pray you, do.","Please, come."
"Of that quick spirit that is in Antony. Let me not hinder, Cassius, your desires. I’ll leave you.","I don’t like sports. I’m not competitive like Antony. But don’t let me keep you from going, Cassius. I’ll go my own way."
"Brutus, I do observe you now of late And show of love as I was wont to have. You bear too stubborn and too strange a hand Over your friend that loves you.","Brutus, I’ve been watching you lately. You seem less good-natured and affectionate toward me than usual. You’ve been stubborn and unfamiliar with me, your friend who loves you."
"Cassius, Be not deceived. If I have veiled my look, Merely upon myself. Vexèd I am Of late with passions of some difference, Conceptions only proper to myself, Which give some soil perhaps to my behaviors. Among which number, Cassius, be you one— Nor construe any further my neglect Than that poor Brutus, with himself at war, Forgets the shows of love to other men.","Cassius, don’t take it badly. If I seem guarded, it’s only because I’m uneasy with myself. Lately I’ve been overwhelmed with private thoughts and inner conflicts, which have affected my behavior. But this shouldn’t trouble my good friends—and I consider you a good friend, Cassius. Don’t think anything more about my distraction than that poor Brutus, who is at war with himself, forgets to show affection to others."
"By means whereof this breast of mine hath buried Thoughts of great value, worthy cogitations. Tell me, good Brutus, can you see your face?","Brutus, I misunderstood your feelings, and therefore kept to myself certain thoughts I might have shared. Tell me, good Brutus, can you see your face?"
"No, Cassius, for the eye sees not itself","No, Cassius. The eye can’t see itself, except by reflection in other surfaces."
"'Tis just. And it is very much lamented, Brutus, That you have no such mirrors as will turn Your hidden worthiness into your eye Where many of the best respect in Rome, Except immortal Caesar, speaking of Brutus And groaning underneath this age’s yoke, Have wished that noble Brutus had his eyes.","That’s true. And it’s too bad, Brutus, that you don’t have any mirrors that could display your hidden excellence to yourself. I’ve heard many of the noblest Romans—next to immortal Caesar—speaking of you, complaining of the tyranny of today’s government, and wishing that your eyes were working better."
That you would have me seek into myself For that which is not in me?,"What dangers are you trying to lead me into, Cassius, that you want me to look inside myself for something that’s not there?"
"Therefore, good Brutus, be prepared to hear. And since you know you cannot see yourself Will modestly discover to yourself That of yourself which you yet know not of. And be not jealous on me, gentle Brutus. Were I a common laugher, or did use To every new protester, if you know That I do fawn on men and hug them hard And, after, scandal them, or if you know That I profess myself in banqueting","I’ll tell you, good Brutus. And since you know you can see yourself best by reflection, I’ll be your mirror and show you, without exaggeration, things inside you that you can’t see. And don’t be suspicious of me, noble Brutus. If I were your average fool, or if I made my feelings for you worthless by making the same promises of friendship to everybody, or if you’d seen me first flattering men, hugging them tightly, and later slandering them behind their backs, or if you hear that I drunkenly declare friendship at banquets with all the rabble, only then, of course, go ahead and assume I’m dangerous."
"What means this shouting? I do fear, the people Choose Caesar for their king.",Why are they shouting? I’m afraid the people have made Caesar their king.
"Ay, do you fear it? Then must I think you would not have it so.","Really, are you afraid of that? Then I have to assume you don’t want him to be king."
"I would not, Cassius. Yet I love him well. What is it that you would impart to me? If it be aught toward the general good, Set honor in one eye and death i' th' other, And I will look on both indifferently, The name of honor more than I fear death.","I don’t, Cassius, though I love Caesar very much. But why do you keep me here so long? What do you want to tell me? If it’s for the good of all Romans, I’d do it even if it meant my death. Let the gods give me good luck only as long as I love honor more than I fear death."
"I know that virtue to be in you, Brutus, As well as I do know your outward favor. Well, honor is the subject of my story. Think of this life, but, for my single self, I had as lief not be as live to be In awe of such a thing as I myself. I was born free as Caesar. So were you. Endure the winter’s cold as well as he. For once upon a raw and gusty day, The troubled Tiber chafing with her shores, Caesar said to me, “Darest thou, Cassius, now And swim to yonder point?” Upon the word, Accoutred as I was, I plungèd in And bade him follow. So indeed he did. The torrent roared, and we did buffet it And stemming it with hearts of controversy. But ere we could arrive the point proposed, Caesar cried, “Help me, Cassius, or I sink!” I, as Aeneas, our great ancestor, The old Anchises bear, so from the waves of Tiber Did I the tired Caesar. And this man","I know this quality in you, Brutus—it’s as familiar to me as your face. Indeed, honor is what I want to talk to you about. I don’t know what you and other men think of this life, but as for me, I’d rather not live at all than live to worship a man as ordinary as myself. I was born as free as Caesar. So were you. We both have eaten as well, and we can both endure the cold winter as well as he. Once, on a cold and windy day, when the river Tiber was crashing against its banks, Caesar said to me, “Cassius, I dare you to jump into this rough water with me and swim to that point there.” As soon as he spoke, though I was fully dressed, I plunged in and called for him to follow. And he did. The water roared, and we fought against it with vigorous arms. And, thanks to our fierce competitiveness, we made progress. But before we reached the end point, Caesar cried, “Help me, Cassius, or I will sink!” And just as Aeneas, the hero who founded Rome, emerged from the fires of Troy with his elderly father Anchises on his shoulder, so I emerged from the Tiber carrying the tired Caesar."
"Is now become a god, and Cassius is A wretched creature and must bend his body He had a fever when he was in Spain, And when the fit was on him, I did mark How he did shake. 'Tis true, this god did shake! His coward lips did from their color fly, Did lose his luster. I did hear him groan, Ay, and that tongue of his that bade the Romans Mark him and write his speeches in their books— “Alas,” it cried, “give me some drink, Titinius,” A man of such a feeble temper should So get the start of the majestic world And bear the palm alone.","And this is the man who has now become a god, and I’m a wretched creature who must bow down if Caesar so much as carelessly nods my way. In Spain, Caesar had a fever, and it made him shake. It’s true, this so-called “god”—he shook. His cowardly lips turned white, and the same eye whose gaze terrifies the world lost its gleam. I heard him groan—yes, I did—and the same tongue that ordered the Romans to obey him and transcribe his speeches in their books cried, “Give me some water, Titinius,” like a sick girl. It astounds me that such a weak man could beat the whole world and carry the trophy of victory alone."
Another general shout! I do believe that these applauses are,More shouting! I think this applause is for some new honors awarded to Caesar.
"Why, man, he doth bestride the narrow world Like a Colossus, and we petty men Walk under his huge legs and peep about To find ourselves dishonorable graves. The fault, dear Brutus, is not in our stars But in ourselves, that we are underlings. Brutus and Caesar—what should be in that “Caesar”? Why should that name be sounded more than yours? Sound them, it doth become the mouth as well. Weigh them, it is as heavy. Conjure with 'em,","Why, Caesar straddles the narrow world like a giant, and we petty men walk under his huge legs and look forward only to dying dishonorably, as slaves. Men can be masters of their fate. It is not destiny’s fault, but our own faults, that we’re slaves. “Brutus” and “Caesar.” What’s so special about “Caesar”? Why should that name be proclaimed more than yours? Write them together—yours is just as good a name. Pronounce them—it is just as nice to say. Weigh them—it’s just as heavy."
"“Brutus” will start a spirit as soon as “Caesar.” Now in the names of all the gods at once, That he is grown so great? Age, thou art shamed! Rome, thou hast lost the breed of noble bloods! When went there by an age, since the great flood, But it was famed with more than with one man? That her wide walks encompassed but one man? Now is it Rome indeed, and room enough, When there is in it but one only man. Oh, you and I have heard our fathers say, Th' eternal devil to keep his state in Rome As easily as a king.","Cast spells with them, and “Brutus” will call up a ghost as well as “Caesar.” Now, in the name of all the gods, I ask you what food does Caesar eat that has made him grow so great? Our era should be ashamed! Rome has lost the ability to raise noble men! When was there ever an age, since the beginning of time, that didn’t feature more than one famous man? Until now, no one could say that only one man mattered in all of vast Rome. Now, though, in all of Rome, there’s room for only one man. You and I have heard our fathers talk of another Brutus—your ancestor—who would’ve let the devil himself reign in his Roman Republic before he let a king rule."
"That you do love me, I am nothing jealous. What you would work me to, I have some aim. I shall recount hereafter. For this present, I would not, so with love I might entreat you, Be any further moved. What you have said I will consider, what you have to say Both meet to hear and answer such high things. Till then, my noble friend, chew upon this: Brutus had rather be a villager Than to repute himself a son of Rome Is like to lay upon us.","I have no doubt that you love me. I’m beginning to understand what you want me to do. What I think about this, and about what’s happening here in Rome, I’ll tell you later. For now, don’t try to persuade me anymore—I ask you as a friend. I’ll think over what you’ve said, I’ll listen patiently to whatever else you have to say, and I’ll find a good time for us to discuss further such weighty matters. Until then, my noble friend, think about this: I’d rather be a poor villager than call myself a citizen of Rome under the hard conditions that this time is likely to put us through."
I am glad that my weak words Have struck but thus much show of fire from Brutus.,I’m glad that my weak words have provoked even this small show of protest from you.
The games are done and Caesar is returning.,The games are done and Caesar is returning.
"As they pass by, pluck Casca by the sleeve, What hath proceeded worthy note today.","As they pass by, grab Casca by the sleeve, and he’ll tell you if anything important happened today—in his usual sour way."
"I will do so. But, look you, Cassius, The angry spot doth glow on Caesar’s brow, And all the rest look like a chidden train. Looks with such ferret and such fiery eyes As we have seen him in the Capitol Being crossed in conference by some senators.","I’ll do so. But look, Cassius, Caesar looks angry and everyone else looks as if they’ve been scolded. Calphurnia’s face is pale, and Cicero’s eyes are as red and fiery as they get when senators are arguing with him at the Capitol."
Casca will tell us what the matter is.,Casca will tell us what’s the matter.
Antonio.,Antonio!
Caesar.,Caesar?
"(aside to ANTONY) Let me have men about me that are fat, Sleek-headed men and such as sleep a-nights. Yond Cassius has a lean and hungry look.","(speaking so that only ANTONY can hear) I want the men around me to be fat, healthy-looking men who sleep at night. That Cassius over there has a lean and hungry look. He thinks too much. Men like him are dangerous."
"(aside to CAESAR) Fear him not, Caesar. He’s not dangerous. He is a noble Roman and well given.","(speaking so that only CAESAR can hear) Don’t be afraid of him, Caesar. He isn’t dangerous. He’s a noble Roman with a good disposition."
"(aside to ANTONY) Would he were fatter! But I fear him not. Yet if my name were liable to fear, So soon as that spare Cassius. He reads much. He is a great observer, and he looks Quite through the deeds of men. He loves no plays, As thou dost, Antony. He hears no music. As if he mocked himself and scorned his spirit That could be moved to smile at anything. Such men as he be never at heart’s ease Whiles they behold a greater than themselves, I rather tell thee what is to be feared Than what I fear, for always I am Caesar. Come on my right hand, for this ear is deaf, And tell me truly what thou think’st of him.","(speaking so that only ANTONY can hear) I wish he were fatter! But I’m not afraid of him. And yet, if I were capable of fearing anyone, Cassius would be the first man I’d avoid. He reads a lot, he’s a keen observer, and he sees the hidden motives in what men do. He doesn’t like plays the way you do, Antony. He doesn’t listen to music. He rarely smiles, and when he does smile, he does so in a self-mocking way, as if he scorns himself for smiling at all. Men like him will never be comfortable while someone ranks higher than themselves, and therefore they’re very dangerous. I’m telling you what should be feared, not what I fear—because after all, I am Caesar. Come over to my right side, because this ear is deaf, and tell me what you really think of Cassius."
You pulled me by the cloak. Would you speak with me?,(to BRUTUS) You tugged on my cloak. Do you want to speak with me?
"Ay, Casca. Tell us what hath chanced today That Caesar looks so sad.","Yes, Casca. Tell us what happened today that put Caesar in such a serious mood."
"Why, you were with him, were you not?","But you were with him, weren’t you?"
I should not then ask Casca what had chanced.,"If I were, I wouldn’t need to ask you what happened."
"Why, there was a crown offered him; and, being offered him, he put it by with the back of his hand, thus; and then the people fell a-shouting.","A crown was offered to him, and he pushed it away with the back of his hand, like this—and then the people started shouting."
What was the second noise for?,What was the second noise for?
"Why, for that too.",The same thing.
They shouted thrice. What was the last cry for?,They shouted three times. What was the last cry for?
"Why, for that too.",For the same thing.
Was the crown offered him thrice?,The crown was offered to him three times?
"Ay, marry, was ’t, and he put it by thrice, every time gentler than other, and at every putting-by mine honest neighbors shouted.","Yes, indeed, it was, and he pushed it away three times, each time more gently than the last; and at each refusal my countrymen shouted."
Who offered him the crown?,Who offered him the crown?
"Why, Antony.",Antony.
"Tell us the manner of it, gentle Casca.","Tell us how it happened, noble Casca."
"I can as well be hanged as tell the manner of it. It was mere foolery. I did not mark it. I saw Mark Antony offer him a crown (yet ’twas not a crown neither, ’twas one of these coronets) and, as I told you, he put it by once—but, for all that, to my thinking, he would fain have had it. Then he offered it to him again, then he put it by again—but, to my thinking, he was very loath to lay his fingers off it. And then he offered it the third time. He put it the third time by. And still, as he refused it, the rabblement hooted and clapped their chapped hands and threw up their sweaty night-caps and uttered such a deal of stinking breath because Caesar refused the crown that it had almost choked Caesar—for he swooned and fell down at it. And for mine own part, I durst not laugh for fear of opening my lips and receiving the bad air.","I can’t explain it. It was all silly and so I paid no attention. I saw Mark Antony offer him a crown—though it wasn’t a real crown, just a small circlet—and, as I told you, he refused it once—though in my opinion he would’ve liked to have it. Then Antony offered it to him again, and he refused it again (though, in my opinion, he was reluctant to take his hand off it). Then Antony offered it the third time. He refused it the third time, and as he refused it the commoners hooted and clapped their chapped hands, and threw up their sweaty hats, and let loose such a great deal of stinking breath because Caesar refused the crown that it nearly choked Caesar, because he fainted and fell down. As for myself, I didn’t dare laugh, for fear of opening my lips and inhaling the stinking air."
"But soft, I pray you. What, did Caesar swoon?","But wait a minute, please. Did you say Caesar fainted?"
"He fell down in the marketplace, and foamed at mouth, and was speechless.",He fell down in the marketplace and foamed at the mouth and was speechless.
'Tis very like. He hath the falling sickness.,"That’s very likely. He has epilepsy, a disease where you fall down."
"No, Caesar hath it not. But you and I And honest Casca, we have the falling sickness.","No, Caesar doesn’t have epilepsy. You and I, and honest Casca, we have epilepsy—we’ve fallen."
"I know not what you mean by that, but I am sure Caesar fell down. If the tag-rag people did not clap him and hiss him according as he pleased and displeased them, as they use to do the players in the theatre, I am no true man.","I don’t know what you mean by that, but I’m sure Caesar fell down. The rabble applauded and hissed him according to whether he pleased them or displeased them, just like they do to actors in the theater. If they didn’t, I’m a liar."
What said he when he came unto himself?,What did he say when he regained consciousness?
"Marry, before he fell down, when he perceived the common herd was glad he refused the crown, he plucked me ope his doublet and offered them his throat to cut. An I had been a man of any occupation, if I would not have taken him at a word, I would I might go to hell among the rogues. And so he fell. When he came to himself again, he said, if he had done or said anything amiss, he desired their worships to think it was his infirmity. Three or four wenches where I stood cried, “Alas, good soul!” and forgave him with all their hearts. But there’s no heed to be taken of them. If Caesar had stabbed their mothers they would have done no less.","Indeed, before he fell down, when he realized the commoners were glad he refused the crown, he pulled open his robe and offered them his throat to cut. If I’d been a common laborer and hadn’t taken him up on his offer, to hell with me. And so he fainted. When he regained consciousness again, he said that if he’d done or said anything wrong, he wanted them to know that it was all because of his sickness. Three or four women near me cried, “Alas, good soul!” and forgave him with all their hearts. But never mind them—if Caesar had stabbed their mothers, they would’ve forgiven him."
And after that he came thus sad away?,And after that he came back here looking so serious?
Ay.,Yes.
Did Cicero say anything?,Did Cicero say anything?
"Ay, he spoke Greek.","Yes, he said something in Greek."
To what effect?,What did he say?
"Nay, an I tell you that, I’ll ne'er look you i' th' face again. But those that understood him smiled at one another and shook their heads. But, for mine own part, it was Greek to me. I could tell you more news too. Murellus and Flavius, for pulling scarfs off Caesar’s images, are put to silence. Fare you well. There was more foolery yet, if I could remember it.","If I told you I understood Greek, I’d be lying. But those who understood him smiled at one another and shook their heads. As for myself, it was Greek to me. I have more news too. Murellus and Flavius have been punished for pulling scarves off statues of Caesar. There you go. There was even more foolishness, if I could only remember it."
"Will you sup with me tonight, Casca?","Will you have dinner with me tonight, Casca?"
"No, I am promised forth.","No, I have a commitment."
Will you dine with me tomorrow?,Will you dine with me tomorrow?
"Ay, if I be alive and your mind hold and your dinner worth the eating.","Yes, if I’m still alive, and you’re still sane, and your dinner is worth eating."
Good. I will expect you.,Good. I’ll expect you.
Do so. Farewell both.,Do so. Farewell to you both.
What a blunt fellow is this grown to be! He was quick mettle when he went to school.,What a stupid man he’s become! He was so sharp when he was in school.
"So is he now in execution Of any bold or noble enterprise, This rudeness is a sauce to his good wit, Which gives men stomach to digest his words With better appetite.","He’s still sharp when it comes to carrying out a bold or noble enterprise, though he puts on this show of stupidity. He speaks roughly, but what he says is smart, and his roughness makes other people enjoy listening to him."
"And so it is. For this time I will leave you. I will come home to you. Or, if you will, Come home to me, and I will wait for you.","You’re right, that’s how it is. I’ll leave you for now. If you’d like to talk tomorrow, I’ll come to your home. Or, if you don’t mind, come to my home, and I’ll wait for you."
"I will do so. Till then, think of the world.","I’ll do so. Until then, think about the well-being of Rome."
"Well, Brutus, thou art noble. Yet I see From that it is disposed. Therefore it is meet That noble minds keep ever with their likes, For who so firm that cannot be seduced? Caesar doth bear me hard, but he loves Brutus. He should not humor me. I will this night, In several hands, in at his windows throw, As if they came from several citizens, Writings all tending to the great opinion Caesar’s ambition shall be glancèd at. And after this let Caesar seat him sure, For we will shake him, or worse days endure.","Well, Brutus, you’re noble. Yet I see that your honorable character can be bent from its usual shape, which proves that good men should stick only to the company of other good men, because who is so firm that he can’t be seduced? Caesar resents me, but he loves Brutus. If I were Brutus now and Brutus were me, I wouldn’t have let him influence me. Tonight I’ll throw through his window a few letters in different handwriting—as if they came from several citizens—all testifying to the great respect Romans have for Brutus, and all alluding to Caesar’s unseemly ambition. And after this, let Caesar brace himself, for we’ll either dethrone him or suffer even worse than now."
"Good even, Casca. Brought you Caesar home? Why are you breathless? And why stare you so?","Good evening, Casca. Did you accompany Caesar home? Why are you breathless, and why are you staring like that?"
"Are not you moved when all the sway of earth Shakes like a thing unfirm? O Cicero, Have rived the knotty oaks, and I have seen Th' ambitious ocean swell and rage and foam To be exalted with the threatening clouds, But never till tonight, never till now, Either there is a civil strife in heaven, Or else the world, too saucy with the gods, Incenses them to send destruction.","Aren’t you disturbed when the earth itself is shaking and swaying as if it were a flimsy thing? Cicero, I’ve seen storms in which the angry winds split old oak trees, and I’ve seen the ocean swell, rage, and foam, as if it wanted to reach the storm clouds, but never before tonight, never until now, have I experienced a storm that drops fire. Either there are wars in heaven, or else the world, too insolent toward the gods, provokes them to send destruction."
"Why, saw you anything more wonderful?",What—have you seen something so strange that it is clearly an omen from the gods?
"Held up his left hand, which did flame and burn Like twenty torches joined, and yet his hand, Not sensible of fire, remained unscorched. Besides—I ha' not since put up my sword— Who glared upon me and went surly by, Without annoying me. And there were drawn Upon a heap a hundred ghastly women, Transformèd with their fear, who swore they saw","A common slave—you’d know him if you saw him—held up his left hand, which flamed and burned like twenty torches together. And yet his hand was immune to the fire and didn’t get burned. Also—I’ve kept my sword unsheathed since I saw this—in front of the Capitol I met a lion who looked at me and strutted by without bothering to attack me. And there were a hundred spooked women huddled together in fear who swore they saw men on fire walk up and down the streets."
"And yesterday the bird of night did sit Even at noon-day upon the marketplace, Hooting and shrieking. When these prodigies Do so conjointly meet, let not men say, For I believe they are portentous things Unto the climate that they point upon.","And yesterday the night owl sat hooting and shrieking in the marketplace at noon. When all these extraordinary things happen at once, we shouldn’t say, “These happenings can be explained rationally. They’re natural enough.” I think these things are omens of things to come in our country."
"Indeed, it is a strange-disposèd time. But men may construe things after their fashion, Comes Caesar to the Capitol tomorrow?","Indeed, it’s a strange time. But men tend to interpret things however suits them and totally miss the actual meaning of the things themselves. Is Caesar visiting the Capitol tomorrow?"
"He doth, for he did bid Antonius Send word to you he would be there tomorrow.","He is, because he told Antonius to tell you he’d be there tomorrow."
"Good night then, Casca. This disturbèd sky","Good night then, Casca. This bad weather isn’t good to walk around in."
"Farewell, Cicero.","Farewell, Cicero"
Who’s there?,Who’s there?
A Roman.,A Roman.
"Casca, by your voice.",It’s Casca—I know your voice.
"Your ear is good. Cassius, what night is this!","Your ear is good. Cassius, what a night this is!"
A very pleasing night to honest men.,It’s a very pleasing night to honest men.
Who ever knew the heavens menace so?,Who ever saw the heavens threaten like this?
"Those that have known the earth so full of faults. For my part, I have walked about the streets, Submitting me unto the perilous night, And, thus unbracèd, Casca, as you see, And when the cross blue lightning seemed to open The breast of heaven, I did present myself Even in the aim and very flash of it.","Those who have known how bad things are here on earth. I have walked around the streets, exposing myself to the perilous night, unbuttoned like this, as you see, Casca, baring my chest to the thunderbolt. When the forked blue lightning seemed to break open the sky, I put myself right where I thought it would hit."
But wherefore did you so much tempt the heavens? When the most mighty gods by tokens send Such dreadful heralds to astonish us.,But why did you tempt the heavens like that? Mankind’s role is to fear and tremble when the almighty gods send warning signals.
"You are dull, Casca, and those sparks of life That should be in a Roman you do want, And put on fear, and cast yourself in wonder To see the strange impatience of the heavens. But if you would consider the true cause Why all these fires, why all these gliding ghosts, Why old men fool and children calculate, Why all these things change from their ordinance Their natures and preformèd faculties To monstrous quality—why, you shall find To make them instruments of fear and warning Unto some monstrous state. Now could I, Casca, name to thee a man Most like this dreadful night, As doth the lion in the Capitol—","You’re acting stupid, Casca, and you lack the quick wits that a Roman should have—or else you don’t use them. You go pale, you stare, and you act in awe of the strange disturbance in the heavens. But if you thought about the real reason for all these fires, all these gliding ghosts, for why birds and animals abandon their natural behavior, why old men, fools, and children make predictions, why all sorts of things have departed from the usual course of their natures and become monstrosities, then you’d understand that heaven had them act this way so they would serve as frightening warnings of an unnatural state to come. Right this minute, Casca, I could name a man who’s just like this dreadful night. A man who thunders, throws lightning, splits open graves, and roars like the lion in the Capitol."
"A man no mightier than thyself or me In personal action, yet prodigious grown, And fearful as these strange eruptions are.","A man no mightier than you or I in ability, yet grown as huge and frightening as tonight’s strange happenings."
"'Tis Caesar that you mean. Is it not, Cassius?","You’re talking about Caesar, right, Cassius?"
"Let it be who it is. For Romans now Have thews and limbs like to their ancestors, But—woe the while!—our fathers' minds are dead, And we are governed with our mothers' spirits.","Let it be who it is. Romans today still have the powerful bodies of their ancestors, but, unfortunately, we don’t have their manly spirits, and instead we take after our mothers. Our tolerance for slavery and oppression shows us to be weak, like women."
"Indeed, they say the senators tomorrow Mean to establish Caesar as a king, And he shall wear his crown by sea and land In every place save here in Italy.","Indeed, they say that the senators plan to establish Caesar as a king tomorrow, and he’ll wear his crown at sea and on land everywhere except here in Italy."
"Cassius from bondage will deliver Cassius. Therein, ye gods, you make the weak most strong. Therein, ye gods, you tyrants do defeat. Nor stony tower, nor walls of beaten brass, Can be retentive to the strength of spirit. But life, being weary of these worldly bars, Never lacks power to dismiss itself. If I know this, know all the world besides, I can shake off at pleasure.","I know where I’ll wear this dagger, then. I’ll kill myself to save myself from slavery. In suicide, gods make the weak strong. In suicide, gods allow tyrants to be defeated. No stony tower, no brass walls, no airless dungeon, no iron chains can contain a strong mind. But if a man becomes weary of these obstacles, he can always kill himself. Let everyone beware: I can shake off the tyranny that now oppresses me whenever I choose."
So can I. So every bondman in his own hand bears The power to cancel his captivity.,"So can I. In fact, every imprisoned man holds in his own hand the tool to free himself."
"And why should Caesar be a tyrant then? But that he sees the Romans are but sheep. He were no lion were not Romans hinds. Those that with haste will make a mighty fire Begin it with weak straws. What trash is Rome, For the base matter to illuminate So vile a thing as Caesar! But, O grief, Where hast thou led me? I perhaps speak this Before a willing bondman. Then I know And dangers are to me indifferent.","How can Caesar be a tyrant then? Poor man! I know he wouldn’t be a wolf if the Romans didn’t act like sheep. He couldn’t be a lion if the Romans weren’t such easy prey. People who want to start a big fire quickly start with little twigs. Rome becomes complete trash, nothing but rubbish and garbage, when it works to light up the ambitions of someone as worthless as Caesar. But, oh no! What have I said in my grief? I might be speaking to someone who wants to be a slave, in which case I’ll be held accountable for my words. But I’m armed and I don’t care about danger."
"You speak to Casca, and to such a man That is no fleering telltale. Hold, my hand. Be factious for redress of all these griefs, As who goes farthest.","You’re talking to Casca, not to some smiling, two-faced tattletale. Say no more. Shake my hand. If you’re joining together to right these wrongs, I’ll go as far as any one of you."
"There’s a bargain made. Now know you, Casca, I have moved already Some certain of the noblest-minded Romans To undergo with me an enterprise And I do know by this they stay for me In Pompey’s porch. For now, this fearful night, There is no stir or walking in the streets, And the complexion of the element Most bloody, fiery, and most terrible.","That’s a deal. Now let me tell you, Casca, I have already convinced some of the noblest Romans to join me in an honorable but dangerous mission. And I know that by now they’re waiting for me on the porch outside Pompey’s theater. We’re meeting on this fearful night because no one is out on the streets. The sky tonight looks bloody, fiery, and terrible, just like the work we have to do."
"Stand close awhile, for here comes one in haste.",Hide for a minute—someone’s approaching fast.
"'Tis Cinna. I do know him by his gait. He is a friend.—Cinna, where haste you so?","It’s Cinna. I recognize his walk. He’s a friend. Cinna, where are you going in such a hurry?"
To find out you. Who’s that? Metellus Cimber?,To find you. Who’s that? Metellus Cimber?
"No, it is Casca, one incorporate To our attempts. Am I not stayed for, Cinna?","No, it’s Casca, someone who’s going to work with us. Aren’t the others waiting for me, Cinna?"
I am glad on ’t. What a fearful night is this! There’s two or three of us have seen strange sights.,I’m glad Casca is with us. What a fearful night this is! Two or three of us have seen strange things.
Am I not stayed for? Tell me.,Are the others waiting? Tell me.
"Yes, you are. O Cassius, if you could But win the noble Brutus to our party—","Yes, they are. Oh, Cassius, if you could only convince Brutus to join us—"
"Be you content. Good Cinna, take this paper, Where Brutus may but find it. And throw this In at his window. Set this up with wax Upon old Brutus' statue. All this done, Repair to Pompey’s porch, where you shall find us.","Don’t worry. Good Cinna, take this paper and be sure to lay it in the judge’s chair where Brutus sits, so he’ll find it. And throw this one in his window, and attach this one with wax to the statue of Brutus’s ancestor, old Brutus. When you’ve finished all this, return to the porch of Pompey’s theater, where you’ll find us. Are Decius Brutus and Trebonius there?"
"All but Metellus Cimber, and he’s gone To seek you at your house. Well, I will hie, And so bestow these papers as you bade me.","Everyone’s there except Metellus Cimber, and he’s gone to look for you at your house. Well, I’ll hurry and put these papers where you told me."
"That done, repair to Pompey’s theatre.","When you’ve finished, go back to Pompey’s theater."
"See Brutus at his house. Three parts of him Is ours already, and the man entire Upon the next encounter yields him ours.","Come on, Casca, you and I will go see Brutus at his house before sunrise. He’s three-quarters on our side already, and we’ll win him over entirely at this meeting."
"Oh, he sits high in all the people’s hearts, His countenance, like richest alchemy, Will change to virtue and to worthiness.","Oh, the people love him well. Things that would look bad if we did them, Brutus could do and look virtuous—just like an alchemist turns worthless tin to gold."
"Him and his worth and our great need of him You have right well conceited. Let us go, We will awake him and be sure of him.","Yes, you’re absolutely right about how worthy Brutus is and how much we need him. Let’s go, because it’s already after midnight, and we want him on our side before daylight."
"What, Lucius, ho!— I cannot by the progress of the stars Give guess how near to day.—Lucius, I say!— I would it were my fault to sleep so soundly.—","Lucius, are you there? I can’t tell by the position of the stars how near it is to daybreak—Lucius, are you there? I wish I had that weakness, to sleep too soundly. Come on, Lucius! Wake up, I say! Lucius!"
"Called you, my lord?","Did you call me, my lord?"
"Get me a taper in my study, Lucius. When it is lighted, come and call me here.","Put a candle in my study, Lucius. Call me when it’s lit."
"I will, my lord.","I will, my lord."
"I know no personal cause to spurn at him But for the general. He would be crowned. How that might change his nature, there’s the question. It is the bright day that brings forth the adder And then I grant we put a sting in him That at his will he may do danger with.","The only way is to kill Caesar. I have no personal reason to strike at him—only the best interest of the people. He wants to be crowned. The question is, how would being king change him? Evil can come from good, just as poisonous snakes tend to come out into the open on bright sunny days—which means we have to walk carefully. If we crown him, I have to admit we’d be giving him the power to do damage."
"Th' abuse of greatness is when it disjoins Remorse from power. And, to speak truth of Caesar, More than his reason. But ’tis a common proof That lowliness is young ambition’s ladder, Whereto the climber upward turns his face. But when he once attains the upmost round, Looks in the clouds, scorning the base degrees By which he did ascend. So Caesar may. Then, lest he may, prevent. And since the quarrel Will bear no color for the thing he is, Would run to these and these extremities. And therefore think him as a serpent’s egg— Which, hatched, would as his kind grow mischievous— And kill him in the shell.","Rulers abuse their power when they separate it from compassion. To be honest, I’ve never known Caesar to let his emotions get the better of his reason. But everyone knows that an ambitious young man uses humility to advance himself, but when he reaches the top, he turns his back on his supporters and reaches for the skies while scorning those who helped him get where he is. Caesar might act like that. Therefore, in case he does, we must hold him back. And since our quarrel is with his future behavior, not what he does now, I must frame the argument like this: if his position is furthered, his character will fulfill these predictions. And therefore we should liken him to a serpent’s egg—once it has hatched, it becomes dangerous, like all serpents. Thus we must kill him while he’s still in the shell."
"Searching the window for a flint, I found This paper, thus sealed up, and I am sure It did not lie there when I went to bed. (gives him a letter)","The candle is burning in your study, sir. While I was looking for a flint to light it, I found this paper on the window, sealed up like this, and I’m sure it wasn’t there when I went to bed. (he gives BRUTUS the letter)"
"Is not tomorrow, boy, the ides of March?","Go back to bed. It isn’t daybreak yet. Is tomorrow the th of March, boy?"
"I know not, sir.","I don’t know, sir."
Look in the calendar and bring me word.,Check the calendar and come tell me.
"I will, sir.","I will, sir."
"Give so much light that I may read by them. (opens the letter and reads) “Brutus, thou sleep’st. Awake, and see thyself. Shall Rome, etc. Speak, strike, redress!” Such instigations have been often dropped Where I have took them up. —“Shall Rome, etc.” Thus must I piece it out: “Shall Rome stand under one man’s awe?” What, Rome? The Tarquin drive when he was called a king. —“Speak, strike, redress!” Am I entreated To speak and strike? O Rome, I make thee promise, If the redress will follow, thou receivest","The meteors whizzing in the sky are so bright that I can read by them. (he opens the letter and reads) “Brutus, you’re sleeping. Wake up and look at yourself. Is Rome going to … etc. Speak, strike, fix the wrongs!” “Brutus, you’re sleeping. Wake up.” I’ve noticed many such calls to action left where I would find them. “Is Rome going to … etc.” What does this mean? Will Rome submit to one man’s power? My ancestors drove Tarquin from the streets of Rome when he was pronounced a king. “Speak, strike, fix it!” Is this asking me to speak and strike? Oh, Rome, I promise you, if you’re meant to receive justice, you’ll receive it by my hand!"
"Sir, March is wasted fifteen days.","Sir, fifteen days of March have gone by."
'Tis good. Go to the gate. Somebody knocks.,Good. Go to the gate. Somebody’s knocking.
"Since Cassius first did whet me against Caesar, I have not slept.",I haven’t slept since Cassius first began to turn me against Caesar.
"And the first motion, all the interim is Like a phantasma or a hideous dream. The genius and the mortal instruments Are then in council, and the state of man, The nature of an insurrection.","From the time when you decide to do something terrible to the moment you do it, everything feels unreal, like a horrible dream. The unconscious and the body work together and rebel against the conscious mind."
"Sir, ’tis your brother Cassius at the door, Who doth desire to see you.","Sir, it’s your brother-in-law Cassius at the door. He wants to see you."
Is he alone?,Is he alone?
"No, sir, there are more with him.","No, sir. There are others with him."
Do you know them?,Do you know them?
"And half their faces buried in their cloaks, That by no means I may discover them By any mark of favor.","No, sir, their hats are pulled down over their ears and their faces are half buried under their cloaks, so there’s no way to tell who they are."
Let 'em enter.,Let them in.
"They are the faction. O conspiracy, When evils are most free? O, then by day Where wilt thou find a cavern dark enough To mask thy monstrous visage? Seek none, conspiracy. Hide it in smiles and affability.","It’s the faction that wants to kill Caesar. Oh, conspiracy, are you ashamed to show your face even at night, when evil things are most free? If so, when it’s day, where are you going to find a cave dark enough to hide your monstrous face? No, don’t bother to find a cave, conspiracy. Instead, hide your true face behind smiles and friendliness."
Not Erebus itself were dim enough To hide thee from prevention.,"If you went ahead and exposed your true face, Hell itself wouldn’t be dark enough to keep you from being found and stopped."
"I think we are too bold upon your rest. Good morrow, Brutus. Do we trouble you?","I’m afraid we’re intruding too boldly on your sleep time. Good morning, Brutus. Are we bothering you?"
Know I these men that come along with you?,I was awake. I’ve been up all night. Do I know these men who are with you?
"Yes, every man of them, and no man here But honors you, and every one doth wish You had but that opinion of yourself This is Trebonius.","Yes, every one of them. There isn’t one of them who doesn’t admire you, and each one of them wishes you had as high an opinion of yourself as every noble Roman has of you. This is Trebonius."
He is welcome hither.,He’s welcome here.
"This, Decius Brutus.",This is Decius Brutus.
He is welcome too.,He’s welcome too.
"This, Casca. This, Cinna. And this, Metellus Cimber.",This is Casca. This is Cinna. And this is Metellus Cimber.
What watchful cares do interpose themselves Betwixt your eyes and night?,They’re all welcome. What worries have kept you awake tonight?
Shall I entreat a word?,Can I have a word with you?
Here lies the east. Doth not the day break here?,Here’s the east. Won’t the dawn come from here?
No.,No.
"O, pardon, sir, it doth, and yon gray lines That fret the clouds are messengers of day.","Excuse me, sir, it will. These gray lines that lace the clouds are the beginnings of the dawn."
"You shall confess that you are both deceived. (points his sword) Which is a great way growing on the south, Weighing the youthful season of the year. Some two months hence up higher toward the north He first presents his fire, and the high east","You’re both wrong. (pointing his sword) Here, where I point my sword, the sun rises. It’s quite near the south, since it’s still winter. About two months from now, the dawn will break further toward the north, and due east is where the Capitol stands, here."
"(comes forward with CASSIUS) Give me your hands all over, one by one. (shakes their hands)","(coming forward with CASSIUS) Give me your hands, all of you, one by one. (he shakes their hands)"
And let us swear our resolution.,And let us swear to our resolution.
"The sufferance of our souls, the time’s abuse— If these be motives weak, break off betimes, And every man hence to his idle bed. So let high-sighted tyranny range on As I am sure they do—bear fire enough To kindle cowards and to steel with valor The melting spirits of women, then, countrymen, What need we any spur but our own cause Than secret Romans that have spoke the word And will not palter? And what other oath Than honesty to honesty engaged, That this shall be, or we will fall for it? Old feeble carrions and such suffering souls That welcome wrongs. Unto bad causes swear Such creatures as men doubt. But do not stain The even virtue of our enterprise, To think that or our cause or our performance Did need an oath, when every drop of blood That every Roman bears—and nobly bears— Is guilty of a several bastardy Of any promise that hath passed from him.","No, let’s not swear an oath. If the sad faces of our fellow men, the suffering of our own souls, and the corruption of the present time aren’t enough to motivate us, let’s break it off now and each of us go back to bed. Then we can let this ambitious tyrant continue unchallenged until each of us is killed at his whim. But if we have reasons that are strong enough to ignite cowards into action and to make weak women brave—and I think we do—then, countrymen, what else could we possibly need to spur us to action? What bond do we need other than that of discreet Romans who have said what they’re going to do and won’t back down? And what oath do we need other than that we honest men have told each other that this will happen or we will die trying? Swearing is for priests, cowards, overly cautious men, feeble old people, and those long-suffering weaklings who welcome abuse. Only men whom you wouldn’t trust anyway would swear oaths, and for the worst reasons. Don’t spoil the justness and virtue of our endeavor nor weaken our own irrepressible spirits by thinking that we need a binding oath, when the blood that every noble Roman contains within him would be proven bastard’s blood if he broke the smallest part of any promise he had made."
But what of Cicero? Shall we sound him? I think he will stand very strong with us.,But what about Cicero? Should we see what he thinks? I think he will stand strong with us.
Let us not leave him out.,Let’s not leave him out.
"No, by no means.","No, by no means."
"Will purchase us a good opinion And buy men’s voices to commend our deeds. It shall be said his judgment ruled our hands. Our youths and wildness shall no whit appear,","Yes, we should get his support, for his mature presence will make others think well of us and speak out in support of our actions. They’ll assume that Cicero, with his sound judgment, ordered the actions. His dignified maturity will distract attention from our youth and wildness."
"O, name him not. Let us not break with him, For he will never follow anything That other men begin.","No, don’t even mention him. We shouldn’t tell him about our plans. He’ll never follow anything that other men have started."
Then leave him out.,Then leave him out.
Indeed he is not fit.,"Indeed, he’s not right for this."
Shall no man else be touched but only Caesar?,But should we only go after Caesar? No one else?
"Decius, well urged. I think it is not meet Mark Antony, so well beloved of Caesar, Should outlive Caesar. We shall find of him If he improve them, may well stretch so far As to annoy us all; which to prevent, Let Antony and Caesar fall together.","Good point, Decius. I don’t think it would be wise to let Mark Antony, whom Caesar is so fond of, outlive Caesar. We’d find that he was a dangerous plotter. And as you know, his connections, if he put them to good use, might be enough to hurt us all. To prevent this, Mark Antony should die along with Caesar."
"Our course will seem too bloody, Caius Cassius, Like wrath in death and envy afterwards, For Antony is but a limb of Caesar. Let us be sacrificers but not butchers, Caius. We all stand up against the spirit of Caesar, Oh, that we then could come by Caesar’s spirit And not dismember Caesar! But, alas, Caesar must bleed for it. And, gentle friends, Let’s kill him boldly but not wrathfully. Not hew him as a carcass fit for hounds. And let our hearts, as subtle masters do, Stir up their servants to an act of rage And after seem to chide 'em. This shall make Which so appearing to the common eyes, We shall be called purgers, not murderers. And for Mark Antony, think not of him, For he can do no more than Caesar’s arm","Our action will seem too bloody if we cut off Caesar’s head and then hack at his arms and legs too, Caius Cassius—because Mark Antony is merely one of Caesar’s arms. It’ll look like we killed Caesar out of anger and Mark Antony out of envy. Let’s be sacrificers but not butchers, Caius. We’re all against what Caesar stands for, and there’s no blood in that. Oh, how I wish we could oppose Caesar’s spirit—his overblown ambition—and not hack up Caesar himself! But, unfortunately, Caesar has to bleed if we’re going to stop him. Noble friends, let’s kill him boldly but not with anger. Let’s carve him up like a dish fit for the gods, not chop him up like a carcass fit for dogs. Let’s be angry only long enough to do the deed, and then let’s act like we’re disgusted by what we had to do. This will make our actions seem practical and not vengeful. If we appear calm to the people, they’ll call us surgeons rather than murderers. As for Mark Antony—forget him. He’ll be as useless as Caesar’s arm after Caesar’s head is cut off."
Yet I fear him. For in the engrafted love he bears to Caesar—,"But I’m still afraid of him, because the deep-rooted love he has for Caesar—"
"Alas, good Cassius, do not think of him. If he love Caesar, all that he can do Is to himself: take thought and die for Caesar. To sports, to wildness and much company.","Alas, good Cassius, don’t think about him. If he loves Caesar, then he can only hurt himself—by grieving and dying for Caesar. And I’d be surprised if he even did that, for he prefers sports, fun, and friends."
"There is no fear in him. Let him not die, For he will live and laugh at this hereafter.",There’s nothing to fear in him. Let’s not kill him. He’ll live and laugh at this afterward.
Peace! Count the clock.,Quiet! Count how many times the clock chimes.
The clock hath stricken three.,The clock struck three.
'Tis time to part.,It’s time to leave.
"But it is doubtful yet Whether Caesar will come forth today or no. For he is superstitious grown of late, Quite from the main opinion he held once It may be, these apparent prodigies, The unaccustomed terror of this night, And the persuasion of his augurers May hold him from the Capitol today.","But we still don’t know whether Caesar will go out in public today or not, because he’s become superstitious lately, a complete turnaround from when he used to have such a bad opinion of fortune-tellers, dream interpreters, and ritual mumbo-jumbo. It might happen that these strange signs, the unusual terror of this night, and the urgings of his fortune-tellers will keep him away from the Capitol today."
"I can o'ersway him. For he loves to hear That unicorns may be betrayed with trees, And bears with glasses, elephants with holes, Lions with toils, and men with flatterers. He says he does, being then most flatterèd. Let me work. For I can give his humor the true bent, And I will bring him to the Capitol.","Don’t worry about that. If he’s reluctant, I can convince him. He loves to hear me tell him how men can be snared by flatterers, just like unicorns can be captured in trees, elephants in holes, and lions with nets. When I tell him he hates flatterers, he agrees, just at the moment when I’m flattering him the most. Let me work on him. I can put him in the right mood, and I’ll bring him to the Capitol."
"Nay, we will all of us be there to fetch him.","No, we’ll all go there to bring him."
By the eighth hour. Is that the uttermost?,By eight o'clock. Is that the latest we can do it?
"Be that the uttermost, and fail not then.","Let’s make that the latest, but be sure to get there before then."
"Caius Ligarius doth bear Caesar hard, Who rated him for speaking well of Pompey.","Caius Ligarius doesn’t like Caesar, who berated him for speaking well of Pompey. I wonder that none of you thought about getting his support."
"Now, good Metellus, go along by him. He loves me well, and I have given him reasons. Send him but hither and I’ll fashion him.","Good Metellus, go to him now. He likes me, and I’ve given him good reason to. Just send him here, and I’ll persuade him."
"The morning comes upon ’s. We’ll leave you, Brutus. What you have said, and show yourselves true Romans.","The morning is approaching. We’ll leave, Brutus. Friends, go your separate ways. But all of you, remember what you’ve said and prove yourselves true Romans."
"Good gentlemen, look fresh and merrily. Let not our looks put on our purposes, But bear it as our Roman actors do, And so good morrow to you every one.","Good gentlemen, look like you’re rested and happy. Don’t let our faces betray our plans. Instead, carry yourselves like Roman actors, with cheerful spirits and well-composed faces. And so, good morning to all of you."
"Boy! Lucius!—Fast asleep? It is no matter. Enjoy the honey-heavy dew of slumber. Thou hast no figures nor no fantasies, Therefore thou sleep’st so sound.","Boy! Lucius! Fast asleep? Well, enjoy the sweetness of deep sleep. Your brain isn’t stuffed with the strange shapes and fantasies that come to men who are overwhelmed by worries. That’s why you sleep so soundly."
"Brutus, my lord.","Brutus, my lord."
"Portia, what mean you? Wherefore rise you now? It is not for your health thus to commit Your weak condition to the raw, cold morning.","Portia, what are you doing awake? It isn’t good for your health to expose your weak body to the raw, cold morning."
"Stole from my bed. And yesternight, at supper, You suddenly arose and walked about, Musing and sighing, with your arms across, And when I asked you what the matter was, I urged you further, then you scratched your head And too impatiently stamped with your foot. Yet I insisted; yet you answered not, But with an angry wafture of your hand Fearing to strengthen that impatience Which seemed too much enkindled, and withal Hoping it was but an effect of humor, Which sometime hath his hour with every man. And could it work so much upon your shape As it hath much prevailed on your condition, I should not know you, Brutus. Dear my lord, Make me acquainted with your cause of grief.","It’s not good for your health, either. You rudely snuck out of bed. And last night at dinner, you got up abruptly and paced back and forth with your arms crossed, brooding and sighing, and when I asked you what was the matter, you gave me a dirty look. I asked you again, and you scratched your head and stamped your foot impatiently. I still insisted on knowing what the matter was, but you wouldn’t answer me, instead giving me an angry wave of your hand and telling me to leave you alone. So I left, afraid of further provoking anger that was already inflamed but still hoping this was merely moodiness, which everyone is affected by once in awhile. Your strange mood won’t let you eat or talk or sleep. If it had changed your outward appearance as much as it has affected you on the inside, I wouldn’t even be able to recognize you, Brutus. My dear lord, tell me what’s bothering you."
"I am not well in health, and that is all.",I’m not feeling well—that’s all.
"Brutus is wise, and were he not in health, He would embrace the means to come by it.","You’re smart, though, and if you were sick, you’d take what you needed to get better."
"Why, so I do. Good Portia, go to bed.","I’m doing so. Good Portia, go to bed."
"Is Brutus sick? And is it physical Of the dank morning? What, is Brutus sick, And will he steal out of his wholesome bed, To dare the vile contagion of the night And tempt the rheumy and unpurgèd air You have some sick offense within your mind, Which by the right and virtue of my place I ought to know of. (kneels) And upon my knees By all your vows of love and that great vow Which did incorporate and make us one That you unfold to me, your self, your half, Why you are heavy, and what men tonight Some six or seven who did hide their faces Even from darkness.","Are you sick? And is it healthy to walk uncovered and breathe in the dampness of the morning? You’re sick, yet you sneak out of your warm bed and let the humid and disease-infested air make you sicker? No, my Brutus, you have some sickness within your mind, which by virtue of my position I deserve to know about. (she kneels) And on my knees, I urge you, by my once-praised beauty, by all your vows of love and that great vow of marriage which made the two of us one person, that you should reveal to me, who is one half of yourself, why you’re troubled and what men have visited you tonight. For there were six or seven men here, who hid their faces even in the darkness."
"Kneel not, gentle Portia.","Don’t kneel, noble Portia."
"(rising) I should not need if you were gentle, Brutus. Within the bond of marriage, tell me, Brutus, That appertain to you? Am I yourself But, as it were, in sort or limitation, To keep with you at meals, comfort your bed, And talk to you sometimes?","(getting up) I wouldn’t need to if you were acting nobly. Tell me, Brutus, as your wife, aren’t I supposed to be told the secrets that concern you? Am I part of you only in a limited sense—I get to have dinner with you, sleep with you, and talk to you sometimes?"
"Dwell I but in the suburbs Portia is Brutus' harlot, not his wife.","Is my place only on the outskirts of your happiness? If it’s nothing more than that, then I’m your whore, not your wife."
"You are my true and honorable wife, As dear to me as are the ruddy drops That visit my sad heart.","You’re my true and honorable wife, as dear to me as the blood that runs through my sad heart."
"I grant I am a woman, but withal A woman that Lord Brutus took to wife. I grant I am a woman, but withal A woman well-reputed, Cato’s daughter. Being so fathered and so husbanded? Tell me your counsels. I will not disclose 'em. I have made strong proof of my constancy, Giving myself a voluntary wound And not my husband’s secrets?","If that were true, then I’d know your secret. I admit I’m only a woman, but nevertheless I’m the woman Lord Brutus took for his wife. I admit I’m only a woman, but I’m still a woman from a noble family—I’m Cato’s daughter. Do you really think I’m no stronger than the rest of my sex, with such a father and such a husband? Tell me your secrets. I won’t betray them. I’ve proved my trustworthiness by giving myself a voluntary wound here in my thigh. If I can bear that pain, then I can bear my husband’s secrets."
"O ye gods, Render me worthy of this noble wife!","Oh, gods, make me worthy of this noble wife!"
"Hark, hark! One knocks. Portia, go in awhile. And by and by thy bosom shall partake All my engagements I will construe to thee, All the charactery of my sad brows. Leave me with haste.","Listen! Someone knocks. Portia, go inside awhile, and soon enough you’ll share the secrets of my heart. I’ll explain all that I have committed to do and all the reasons for my sad face. Leave me quickly."
"Lucius, who’s that knocking?","Lucius, who’s that knocking?"
He is a sick man that would speak with you.,Here’s a sick man who wants to speak with you.
"Caius Ligarius, that Metellus spake of.— Boy, stand aside.—Caius Ligarius, how?","It’s Caius Ligarius, whom Metellus spoke of. Boy, stand aside. Caius Ligarius! How are you?"
Vouchsafe good morrow from a feeble tongue.,Please accept my feeble “good morning.”
"O, what a time have you chose out, brave Caius,","Oh, what a time you’ve chosen to be sick, brave Caius! How I wish you felt better!"
I am not sick if Brutus have in hand Any exploit worthy the name of honor.,I’m not sick if you’ve prepared some honorable exploit for me.
"Such an exploit have I in hand, Ligarius, Had you a healthful ear to hear of it.","Indeed, I would have such an exploit for you, Ligarius, if you were healthy enough to hear it."
"By all the gods that Romans bow before, I here discard my sickness! Soul of Rome, Brave son derived from honorable loins, Thou, like an exorcist, hast conjured up And I will strive with things impossible, Yea, get the better of them. What’s to do?","(takes off his head covering) By all the gods that Romans worship, I hereby throw off my sickness! Soul of Rome! Brave son of honorable ancestors! You’ve conjured up my deadened spirit like an exorcist. Now say the word, and I will tackle all kinds of impossible things, and succeed too. What is there to do?"
A piece of work that will make sick men whole.,A deed that will make sick men healthy.
But are not some whole that we must make sick?,But aren’t there some healthy men whom we have to make sick?
I shall unfold to thee as we are going To whom it must be done.,"That too. My dear Caius, I’ll explain the task at hand to you as we walk toward the man we must do it to."
"Set on your foot, And with a heart new-fired I follow you, To do I know not what. But it sufficeth","Start walking, and with an energized heart, I’ll follow you—to what, I don’t know, but I’m satisfied, simply knowing that Brutus leads me."
"Follow me, then.","Follow me, then."
"Nor heaven nor earth have been at peace tonight. Thrice hath Calphurnia in her sleep cried out, “Help, ho! They murder Caesar!”—Who’s within?","Neither the sky nor the earth have been quiet tonight. Calphurnia cried out three times in her sleep, “Help, someone! They’re murdering Caesar!” Who’s there?"
My lord.,My lord?
And bring me their opinions of success.,"Go tell the priests to perform a sacrifice immediately, and bring me their interpretation of the results."
"I will, my lord.","I will, my lord."
"What mean you, Caesar? Think you to walk forth? You shall not stir out of your house today.","What are you doing, Caesar? Are you planning to go out? You’re not leaving the house today."
"Ne'er looked but on my back. When they shall see The face of Caesar, they are vanishèd.","I will go out. The things that threaten me have only seen my back. When they see the face of Caesar, they will vanish."
"Caesar, I never stood on ceremonies, Yet now they fright me. There is one within, Recounts most horrid sights seen by the watch. A lioness hath whelpèd in the streets, And graves have yawned and yielded up their dead.","Caesar, I never believed in omens, but now they frighten me. A servant told me the night-watchmen saw horrid sights too, but different ones from what we heard and saw. A lioness gave birth in the streets, and graves cracked open and thrust out their dead."
"Fierce fiery warriors fought upon the clouds Which drizzled blood upon the Capitol. The noise of battle hurtled in the air. Horses did neigh, and dying men did groan, And ghosts did shriek and squeal about the streets. And I do fear them.","Fierce, fiery warriors fought in the clouds in the usual formations of war—ranks and squadrons—until the clouds drizzled blood onto the Capitol. The noise of battle filled the air, and horses neighed, and dying men groaned, and ghosts shrieked and squealed in the streets. Oh, Caesar! These things are beyond anything we’ve seen before, and I’m afraid."
"What can be avoided Whose end is purposed by the mighty gods? Yet Caesar shall go forth, for these predictions Are to the world in general as to Caesar.","How can we avoid what the gods want to happen? But I will go out, for these bad omens apply to the world in general as much as they do to me."
The heavens themselves blaze forth the death of princes.,When beggars die there are no comets in the sky. The heavens only announce the deaths of princes.
"Cowards die many times before their deaths. The valiant never taste of death but once. Of all the wonders that I yet have heard, Seeing that death, a necessary end, Will come when it will come.","Cowards die many times before their deaths. The brave experience death only once. Of all the strange things I’ve ever heard, it seems most strange to me that men fear death, given that death, which can’t be avoided, will come whenever it wants."
What say the augurers?,What do the priests say?
"They would not have you to stir forth today. Plucking the entrails of an offering forth,",They don’t want you to go out today. They pulled out the guts of the sacrificed animal and couldn’t find its heart.
"The gods do this in shame of cowardice. Caesar should be a beast without a heart If he should stay at home today for fear. No, Caesar shall not. Danger knows full well","The gods do this to test my bravery. They’re saying I’d be an animal without a heart if I stayed home today out of fear. So, I won’t."
"We are two lions littered in one day, And I the elder and more terrible. And Caesar shall go forth.","Danger knows that Caesar is more dangerous than he is. We’re two lions born on the same day in the same litter, and I’m the older and more terrible. I will go out."
"Alas, my lord, Your wisdom is consumed in confidence. That keeps you in the house, and not your own. We’ll send Mark Antony to the senate house, And he shall say you are not well today. (kneels) Let me, upon my knee, prevail in this.","Alas, my lord, your confidence is getting the better of your wisdom. Don’t go out today. Say that it’s my fear that keeps you inside and not your own. We’ll send Mark Antony to the senate house, and he’ll say that you’re sick today. (she kneels) Let me, on my knees, win you over to this plan."
And for thy humor I will stay at home.,"All right. Mark Antony will say I’m not well, and to please you I’ll stay at home."
Here’s Decius Brutus. He shall tell them so.,Here’s Decius Brutus. He’ll tell them so.
"Caesar, all hail! Good morrow, worthy Caesar. I come to fetch you to the senate house.","Hail, Caesar! Good morning, worthy Caesar. I’ve come to take you to the senate house."
"To bear my greeting to the senators And tell them that I will not come today. “Cannot” is false, and that I dare not, falser. I will not come today. Tell them so, Decius.","And you’ve come at a good time, so you can convey my greetings to the senators and tell them I won’t come today. It wouldn’t be true to say that I can’t come, and even less true to say that I don’t dare come. I simply won’t come today. Tell them so, Decius."
Say he is sick.,Say he’s sick.
Shall Caesar send a lie? Have I in conquest stretched mine arm so far To be afraid to tell graybeards the truth?,"Would I send a lie? Have I accomplished so much in battle, but now I’m afraid to tell some old men the truth?"
"Decius, go tell them Caesar will not come.","Decius, go tell them that Caesar won’t come."
"Most mighty Caesar, let me know some cause,","Most mighty Caesar, give me some reason, so I won’t be laughed at when I tell them so."
"The cause is in my will. I will not come. That is enough to satisfy the senate. But for your private satisfaction, Because I love you, I will let you know. She dreamt tonight she saw my statue, Which, like a fountain with an hundred spouts, Did run pure blood. And many lusty Romans Came smiling and did bathe their hands in it. And evils imminent, and on her knee Hath begged that I will stay at home today.","The reason is that it’s what I want. I’m not coming. That’s enough for the senate. But for your private satisfaction, because I love you, I’ll tell you. Calphurnia, my wife, is keeping me at home. Last night, she dreamed she saw a statue of me with a hundred holes in it, like a fountain with pure blood flowing from it, and many happy Romans came smiling and washed their hands in it. She takes these signs for warnings and predictions of terrible evils to come, and, on her knee, she begged me to stay home today."
"This dream is all amiss interpreted. It was a vision fair and fortunate. In which so many smiling Romans bathed, Signifies that from you great Rome shall suck Reviving blood, and that great men shall press For tinctures, stains, relics, and cognizance.","This dream has been interpreted all wrong. It was a good and lucky vision. Your statue spouting blood through many holes, in which many smiling Romans bathed, means that you’ll provide great Rome with sustaining blood, and that great men will strive to get some token of approval from your holy blood. This is what Calphurnia’s dream means."
And this way have you well expounded it.,You’ve offered an excellent interpretation.
"I have, when you have heard what I can say. And know it now: the senate have concluded To give this day a crown to mighty Caesar.",I will have when you hear the rest of what I have to say. The senate has decided to give mighty Caesar a crown today.
"Their minds may change. Besides, it were a mock Apt to be rendered for someone to say, “Break up the senate till another time When Caesar’s wife shall meet with better dreams.” “Lo, Caesar is afraid”? Pardon me, Caesar. For my dear, dear love To your proceeding bids me tell you this, And reason to my love is liable.","If you send them word that you won’t come, they might change their minds. Besides, someone’s likely to joke, “Adjourn the senate until some other time, when Caesar’s wife has had better dreams.” If you hide yourself, won’t they whisper, “Caesar is afraid?” Pardon me, Caesar. My high hopes for your advancement force me to tell you this. My love gets the better of my manners."
"I am ashamèd I did yield to them. Give me my robe, for I will go.","How foolish your fears seem now, Calphurnia! I’m ashamed that I yielded to them. Give me my robe, because I’m going."
"And look, where Publius is come to fetch me.","And look, here’s Publius, come to fetch me."
"Good morrow, Caesar.","Good morning, Caesar."
"—What, Brutus, are you stirred so early too? —Good morrow, Casca.—Caius Ligarius, Caesar was ne'er so much your enemy As that same ague which hath made you lean.","Welcome, Publius. What, Brutus? Are you up this early too? Good morning, Casca. Caius Ligarius, I was never your enemy so much as the sickness that’s made you so thin. What time is it?"
"Caesar, ’tis strucken eight.","Caesar, the clock has struck eight."
I thank you for your pains and courtesy.,I thank you all for your trouble and courtesy.
"See, Antony, that revels long a-nights, Is notwithstanding up.—Good morrow, Antony.","See! Even Antony, who stays up all night partying, is awake. Good morning, Antony."
So to most noble Caesar.,"And to you, most noble Caesar."
"Bid them prepare within. —Now, Cinna.—Now, Metellus.—What, Trebonius, I have an hour’s talk in store for you. Remember that you call on me today. Be near me, that I may remember you.","Tell them to prepare the other room for guests. I’m to blame for making you wait for me. Now, Cinna. Now, Metellus. Trebonius! I have an hour-long matter to discuss with you. Remember to see me today. Stay near me so I’ll remember."
That your best friends shall wish I had been further.,"Caesar, I will. (speaking quietly to himself) In fact, I’ll be so near that your best friends will wish I’d been further away."
"Good friends, go in and taste some wine with me. And we, like friends, will straightway go together.","Good friends, go in and have some wine with me. And we’ll leave together, like friends."
"(aside) That every “like” is not the same, O Caesar,",(quietly to himself) That we are now only “like” friends—Oh Caesar—makes my heart ache.
"(reads aloud) “Caesar, beware of Brutus. Take heed of Cassius. Come not near Casca. Have an eye to Cinna. Trust not Trebonius. Mark well Metellus Cimber. Decius Brutus loves thee not. Thou hast wronged Caius Ligarius. There is but one mind in all these men, and it is bent against Caesar. If thou beest not immortal, look about you. Security gives way to conspiracy. The mighty gods defend thee! Thy lover, Artemidorus” And as a suitor will I give him this. My heart laments that virtue cannot live Out of the teeth of emulation. If thou read this, O Caesar, thou mayst live.","(reading aloud from the letter) “Caesar, beware of Brutus. Watch Cassius. Don’t go near Casca. Keep an eye on Cinna. Don’t trust Trebonius. Pay attention to Metellus Cimber. Decius Brutus doesn’t love you. You’ve wronged Caius Ligarius. These men all have one intention, and it’s directed against Caesar. If you aren’t immortal, watch those around you. A sense of security opens the door to conspiracy. I pray that the mighty gods defend you! Your friend, Artemidorus.” I’ll stand here until Caesar passes by, and I’ll give him this as though it’s a petition. My heart regrets that good men aren’t safe from the bite of jealous rivals. If you read this, Caesar, you might live. If not, the Fates are on the side of the traitors."
"I prithee, boy, run to the senate house. Stay not to answer me, but get thee gone. Why dost thou stay?","Boy, I beg you to run to the senate house. Don’t stay to answer me—get going. Why are you still standing there?"
"To know my errand, madam.","To find out what you want me to do there, madam."
"I would have had thee there and here again —O constancy, be strong upon my side, Set a huge mountain ’tween my heart and tongue! I have a man’s mind but a woman’s might. How hard it is for women to keep counsel!","I want you there and back again before I can even tell you what you should do there. (to herself, so that no one can hear her) Oh, let my determination keep me from speaking what is in my heart! I have a man’s mind, but only a woman’s strength. How hard it is for women to keep secrets! (to LUCIUS) Are you still here?"
"Madam, what should I do? Run to the Capitol, and nothing else? And so return to you, and nothing else?","Madam, what should I do? Run to the Capitol and nothing else? And then return to you and nothing else?"
"Yes, bring me word, boy, if thy lord look well, For he went sickly forth. And take good note Hark, boy! What noise is that?","Yes, return and tell me if your master looks well, because he was sick when he left. And pay attention to what Caesar does and which men are close to him. Listen, boy! What’s that noise?"
"I hear none, madam.","I don’t hear anything, madam."
"Prithee, listen well. I heard a bustling rumor like a fray,","I beg you, listen well. I heard a noise like a scuffle. The wind brings it from the Capitol."
"Sooth, madam, I hear nothing.","Truly, madam, I don’t hear anything."
"Come hither, fellow. Which way hast thou been?","Come here, you. Where are you coming from?"
"At mine own house, good lady.","My own house, good lady."
What is ’t o'clock?,What time is it?
"About the ninth hour, lady.","Around nine o'clock, madam."
Is Caesar yet gone to the Capitol?,Has Caesar gone to the Capital yet?
"Madam, not yet. I go to take my stand To see him pass on to the Capitol.","Madam, not yet. I’m going to stand so I can see him pass on the way to the Capitol."
"Thou hast some suit to Caesar, hast thou not?","You have some plea for Caesar, don’t you?"
"To be so good to Caesar as to hear me, I shall beseech him to befriend himself.","Yes, I do, lady. If it pleases Caesar to be so good to himself as to hear me, I’ll try to get him to do what’s good for him."
"Why, know’st thou any harm’s intended towards him?","Why, do you know of any harm intended toward him?"
"None that I know will be; much that I fear may chance. The throng that follows Caesar at the heels, Of senators, of praetors, common suitors, Will crowd a feeble man almost to death. I’ll get me to a place more void, and there","Nothing that I know for sure, but a lot that I’m afraid might happen. Good morning to you. The street is narrow here. The crowd that follows Caesar at his heels—senators, justices, common petitioners—will suffocate a feeble man almost to death. I’ll move to a more open place and there speak to great Caesar as he walks past."
"I must go in. (aside) Ay me, how weak a thing The heart of woman is! O Brutus, The heavens speed thee in thine enterprise! Sure, the boy heard me. (to LUCIUS) Brutus hath a suit Run, Lucius, and commend me to my lord. Say I am merry. Come to me again, And bring me word what he doth say to thee.","I must go in. (speaking quietly to herself) Oh, a woman’s heart is so weak! Oh Brutus, may the gods aid you in your endeavor! Surely, the boy heard me. (to LUCIUS) Brutus has a claim that Caesar won’t grant. Oh, I feel faint. Run, Lucius, and speak well of me to my lord. Say that I’m happy. Then return to me and tell me what he says to you."
(to the SOOTHSAYER) The ides of March are come.,(to the SOOTHSAYER) March th has come.
"Ay, Caesar, but not gone.","Yes, Caesar, but it’s not gone yet."
"(offering his letter) Hail, Caesar! Read this schedule.","(offering his letter) Hail, Caesar! Read this schedule."
"(offering CAESAR another paper) At your best leisure, this his humble suit.","(offering CAESAR another paper) Trebonius wants you to look over his humble petition, at your leisure."
"O Caesar, read mine first, for mine’s a suit That touches Caesar nearer. Read it, great Caesar.","Oh, Caesar, read mine first, for my petition affects you more directly. Read it, great Caesar."
What touches us ourself shall be last served.,Whatever pertains to myself I will deal with last.
"Delay not, Caesar. Read it instantly.","Don’t delay, Caesar. Read it instantly."
"What, is the fellow mad?","What, is the man insane?"
"(to ARTEMIDORUS)    Sirrah, give place.","(to ARTEMIDORUS) Stand aside, you."
"(to ARTEMIDORUS) What, urge you your petitions in the street?",(to ARTEMIDORUS) What? Are you pressing your petition on the street? Go to the Capitol.
(to CASSIUS) I wish your enterprise today may thrive.,(to CASSIUS) I hope your endeavor goes well today.
"What enterprise, Popillius?","What endeavor, Popillius?"
Fare you well.,Good luck.
(to CASSIUS) What said Popillius Lena?,(to CASSIUS) What did Popillius Lena say?
(aside to BRUTUS) I fear our purpose is discoverèd.,(speaking so that only BRUTUS can hear) He wished that our endeavor would go well today. I’m afraid we’ve been found out.
Look how he makes to Caesar. Mark him.,"Look, he’s approaching Caesar. Keep an eye on him."
"Casca, be sudden, for we fear prevention —Brutus, what shall be done? If this be known, For I will slay myself.","Casca, be quick, because we’re worried we might be stopped. Brutus, what will we do? If our secret’s known, either Caesar or I will die, for I’ll kill myself."
"Cassius, be constant. Popillius Lena speaks not of our purposes. For, look, he smiles, and Caesar doth not change.","Cassius, stand firm. Popillius Lena wasn’t talking about our plot—for, look, he’s smiling, and Caesar’s expression is the same."
"Trebonius knows his time. For, look you, Brutus.","Trebonius knows his cue. See, Brutus, he’s pulling Mark Antony aside."
Where is Metellus Cimber? Let him go And presently prefer his suit to Caesar.,Where’s Metellus Cimber? He should go up and offer his petition to Caesar now.
He is addressed. Press near and second him.,They’re speaking to him. Go up there and second his petition.
"Casca, you are the first that rears your hand.","Casca, you’ll be the first to raise your hand."
That Caesar and his senate must redress?,Are we all ready? What problem should I discuss with you first?
"(kneeling) Most high, most mighty, and most puissant Caesar, Metellus Cimber throws before thy seat","(kneeling) Most high, most mighty, and most powerful Caesar, Metellus Cimber kneels before you with a humble heart—"
"I must prevent thee, Cimber. These couchings and these lowly courtesies Might fire the blood of ordinary men And turn preordinance and first decree Into the law of children. Be not fond, That will be thawed from the true quality With that which melteth fools—I mean, sweet words, Low-crookèd curtsies, and base spaniel fawning. Thy brother by decree is banishèd. I spurn thee like a cur out of my way. Know, Caesar doth not wrong, nor without cause Will he be satisfied.","I have to stop you, Cimber. These kneelings and humble courtesies might excite ordinary men, flattering them into turning Roman law into children’s games. But don’t be so foolish as to think you can sway me from what’s right by using the tactics that persuade fools—I mean this flattery, low bows, and puppy-like fawning. Your brother has been banished by decree. If you kneel and beg and flatter for him, I’ll kick you out of my way like I would a dog. Know that I am not unjust, and I will not grant him a pardon without reason."
Is there no voice more worthy than my own For the repealing of my banished brother?,Is there no voice worthier than my own to appeal to Caesar to repeal the order that my brother be banished?
"(kneeling) I kiss thy hand, but not in flattery, Caesar, Desiring thee that Publius Cimber may Have an immediate freedom of repeal.","(kneeling) I kiss your hand, but not in flattery, Caesar. I ask you to repeal Publius Cimber’s banishment immediately."
"What, Brutus?","What, even you, Brutus?"
"(kneeling)   Pardon, Caesar. Caesar, pardon. As low as to thy foot doth Cassius fall To beg enfranchisement for Publius Cimber.","(kneeling) Pardon him, Caesar, pardon him. I fall to your feet to beg you to restore Publius Cimber to citizenship."
"I could be well moved if I were as you. If I could pray to move, prayers would move me. Of whose true-fixed and resting quality There is no fellow in the firmament. The skies are painted with unnumbered sparks. They are all fire and every one doth shine, So in the world. 'Tis furnished well with men, And men are flesh and blood, and apprehensive, Yet in the number I do know but one That unassailable holds on his rank, Let me a little show it even in this: That I was constant Cimber should be banished, And constant do remain to keep him so.","I could be convinced if I were like you. If I could beg others to change their minds, begging would convince me, too. But I’m as immovable as the northern star, whose stable and stationary quality has no equal in the sky. The sky shows countless stars. They’re all made of fire, and each one shines. But only one among all of them remains in a fixed position. So it is on earth. The world is full of men, and men are flesh and blood, and they are capable of reason. Yet out of all of them, I know only one who is unassailable, who never moves from his position. To show you that that’s me, let me prove it a little even in this case. I was firm in ordering that Cimber be banished, and I remain firm in that decision."
(kneeling) O Caesar—,"(kneeling) Oh, Caesar—"
Hence! Wilt thou lift up Olympus?,Enough! Would you try to lift Mount Olympus?
(kneeling) Great Caesar—,(kneeling) Great Caesar—
Doth not Brutus bootless kneel?,"Haven’t I resisted even Brutus, begging from his knees?"
"Speak, hands, for me!","Hands, speak for me!"
"Et tu, Bruté?—Then fall, Caesar.","And you too, Brutus? In that case, die, Caesar. (he dies)"
"Liberty! Freedom! Tyranny is dead! Run hence, proclaim, cry it about the streets.",Liberty! Freedom! Tyranny is dead! Run and proclaim it in the streets.
"Some to the common pulpits, and cry out, “Liberty, freedom, and enfranchisement!”","Some should go to the public platforms and cry out, “Liberty, freedom, and democracy!”"
Fly not. Stand still. Ambition’s debt is paid.,"People and senators, don’t be afraid. Don’t run away—stay where you are. Only Caesar had to die for his ambition."
"Go to the pulpit, Brutus.","Go to the platform, Brutus."
And Cassius too.,And Cassius too.
Where’s Publius?,Where’s Publius?
"Here, quite confounded with this mutiny.",Here. He’s completely stunned by this mutiny.
"Stand fast together, lest some friend of Caesar’s Should chance—","Stand close together, in case someone loyal to Caesar tries to—"
"Talk not of standing.—Publius, good cheer. There is no harm intended to your person,","Don’t talk about standing together.—Publius, cheer up. We don’t intend any harm to you, nor to anyone else. Tell them this, Publius."
"And leave us, Publius, lest that the people, Rushing on us, should do your age some mischief.","And leave us, Publius, in case the people storming us should harm you."
Do so. And let no man abide this deed But we the doers.,"Do so. And let no one suffer for this deed except us, the perpetrators."
Where is Antony?,Where’s Antony?
"Fled to his house amazed. Men, wives, and children stare, cry out, and run As it were doomsday.","He ran to his house, stunned. Men, wives, and children stare, cry out, and run in the streets as though it were doomsday."
"Fates, we will know your pleasures. That we shall die, we know. 'Tis but the time,","We’ll soon find out what fate has in store for us. All we know is that we’ll die sometime, which is all anyone ever knows, though we try to draw out our days for as long as possible."
"Why, he that cuts off twenty years of life Cuts off so many years of fearing death.","Why, the man who shortens his life by twenty years cuts off twenty years of worrying about death."
"Grant that, and then is death a benefit. So are we Caesar’s friends, that have abridged And let us bathe our hands in Caesar’s blood Up to the elbows, and besmear our swords. Then walk we forth, even to the marketplace, And waving our red weapons o'er our heads","So, then, death is a gift, and we are Caesar’s friends, for we’ve done him a service by shortening his time spent fearing death. Kneel, Romans, kneel, and let’s wash our hands, up to the elbows, in Caesar’s blood and smear it on our swords. Then we’ll go out, even to the marketplace, and, waving our bloody swords over our heads, let’s cry, “Peace, freedom, and liberty!”"
"Stoop, then, and wash.","Kneel then, and wash."
How many ages hence Shall this our lofty scene be acted over In states unborn and accents yet unknown!,How many years from now will this heroic scene be reenacted in countries that don’t even exist yet and in languages not yet known!
"How many times shall Caesar bleed in sport, No worthier than the dust!","How many times will Caesar bleed again in show, though he now lies at the base of Pompey’s statue, as worthless as dust!"
"So oft as that shall be, So often shall the knot of us be called “The men that gave their country liberty.”","As often as it’s replayed, our group will be hailed as the men who gave their country liberty."
"What, shall we forth?","Well, should we go out?"
"Ay, every man away. With the most boldest and best hearts of Rome.","Yes, every man forward. Brutus will lead, and we’ll follow him with the boldest and best hearts of Rome."
Soft! Who comes here? A friend of Antony’s.,Wait a minute. Who’s that coming? It’s a friend of Antony’s.
"(kneeling) Thus, Brutus, did my master bid me kneel. (falls prostrate) Thus did Mark Antony bid me fall down, Brutus is noble, wise, valiant, and honest. Caesar was mighty, bold, royal, and loving. Say I love Brutus, and I honor him. Say I feared Caesar, honored him, and loved him.","(kneeling) Brutus, my master ordered me to kneel like this. (he kneels, head bowed low) He ordered me to kneel low, and, from the ground, like this, he ordered me to say: “Brutus is noble, wise, brave, and honest. Caesar was mighty, bold, royal, and loving. Antony loves Brutus and honors him. Antony feared Caesar, honored him, and loved him."
"May safely come to him and be resolved How Caesar hath deserved to lie in death, Mark Antony shall not love Caesar dead So well as Brutus living, but will follow Thorough the hazards of this untrod state With all true faith. So says my master Antony.","If Brutus will swear that Antony may come to him safely and be convinced that Caesar deserved to be killed, Mark Antony will love dead Caesar not nearly as much as living Brutus, and with true faith he’ll follow the destiny and affairs of noble Brutus through the difficulties of this unprecedented state of affairs.” That’s what my master, Antony, says."
"Thy master is a wise and valiant Roman. I never thought him worse. He shall be satisfied and, by my honor, Depart untouched.","Your master is a wise and honorable Roman. I never thought any less of him. Tell him, if he comes here, I’ll explain everything to him and, on my word, he’ll leave unharmed."
(rising)    I’ll fetch him presently.,(getting up) I’ll get him now.
I know that we shall have him well to friend.,I know that he’ll be on our side.
I wish we may. But yet have I a mind Falls shrewdly to the purpose.,"I hope we can count on him, but I still fear him, and my hunches are usually accurate."
"But here comes Antony.—Welcome, Mark Antony.","But here comes Antony.—Welcome, Mark Antony."
"O mighty Caesar! Dost thou lie so low? Are all thy conquests, glories, triumphs, spoils, —I know not, gentlemen, what you intend, Who else must be let blood, who else is rank.","Oh, mighty Caesar! Do you lie so low? Have all your conquests, glories, triumphs, achievements, come to so little? Farewell. Gentlemen, I don’t know what you intend to do, who else you intend to kill, who else you consider corrupt."
"If I myself, there is no hour so fit As Caesar’s death’s hour, nor no instrument With the most noble blood of all this world. I do beseech ye, if you bear me hard, Now, whilst your purpled hands do reek and smoke, Fulfill your pleasure. Live a thousand years, No place will please me so, no mean of death, As here by Caesar, and by you cut off, The choice and master spirits of this age.","If it’s me, there’s no time as good as this hour of Caesar’s death, and no weapon better than your swords, covered with the noblest blood in the world. I ask you, if you have a grudge against me, to kill me now, while your stained hands still reek of blood. I could live a thousand years and I wouldn’t be as ready to die as I am now. There’s no place I’d rather die than here by Caesar, and no manner of death would please me more than being stabbed by you, the masters of this new era."
"O Antony, beg not your death of us. As by our hands and this our present act You see we do—yet see you but our hands And this the bleeding business they have done. Our hearts you see not. They are pitiful. As fire drives out fire, so pity pity— Hath done this deed on Caesar. For your part, To you our swords have leaden points, Mark Antony. Our arms in strength of malice and our hearts With all kind love, good thoughts, and reverence.","Oh, Antony, don’t beg us to kill you. Though we seem bloody and cruel right now, with our bloody hands and this deed we’ve done, you’ve only seen our hands and their bloody business; you haven’t looked into our hearts. They are full of pity for Caesar. But a stronger pity, for the wrongs committed against Rome, drove out our pity for Caesar, as fire drives out fire, and so we killed him. For you, our swords have blunt edges, too dull to harm you, Mark Antony. Our arms, which can be strong and cruel, and our hearts, filled with brotherly love, embrace you with kind love, good thoughts, and reverence."
Your voice shall be as strong as any man’s In the disposing of new dignities.,Your vote will be as strong as anyone’s in the reordering of the government.
"Only be patient till we have appeased And then we will deliver you the cause, Why I, that did love Caesar when I struck him, Have thus proceeded.","But just be patient until we’ve calmed the masses, who are beside themselves with fear. Then we’ll explain to you why I, who loved Caesar even while I stabbed him, have taken this course of action."
"I doubt not of your wisdom. Let each man render me his bloody hand. First, Marcus Brutus, will I shake with you. —Next, Caius Cassius, do I take your hand. —Now, Decius Brutus, yours.—Now yours, Metellus. —Yours, Cinna.—And, my valiant Casca, yours. —Gentlemen all, alas, what shall I say? My credit now stands on such slippery ground That one of two bad ways you must conceit me, Either a coward or a flatterer If then thy spirit look upon us now, Shall it not grieve thee dearer than thy death To see thy Antony making his peace, Shaking the bloody fingers of thy foes— Had I as many eyes as thou hast wounds, Weeping as fast as they stream forth thy blood, It would become me better than to close In terms of friendship with thine enemies. Here didst thou fall; and here thy hunters stand, Signed in thy spoil, and crimsoned in thy lethe. O world, thou wast the forest to this hart, And this indeed, O world, the heart of thee. Dost thou here lie!","I don’t doubt your wisdom. Each of you, give me your bloody hand. (he shakes hands with the conspirators) First, Marcus Brutus, I shake your hand. Next, Caius Cassius, I take your hand. Now, Decius Brutus, yours. Now yours, Metellus. Yours, Cinna. And yours, my brave Casca. Last but not least, yours, good Trebonius. You are all gentlemen—alas, what can I say? Now that I’ve shaken your hands, you’ll take me for either a coward or a flatterer—in either case, my credibility stands on slippery ground. It’s true that I loved you, Caesar—nothing could be truer. If your spirit is looking down upon us now, it must hurt you more than even your death to see your Antony making peace—shaking the bloody hands of your enemies—in front of your corpse. If I had as many eyes as you have wounds, and they wept as fast as your wounds stream blood—even that would be more becoming than joining your enemies in friendship. Forgive me, Julius! On this very spot you were hunted down, like a brave deer. And here you fell, where your hunters are now standing. The spot is marked by your death and stained by your blood. Oh world, you were the forest to this deer, and this deer, oh world, was your dear. Now you lie here, stabbed by many princes!"
Mark Antony—,Mark Antony—
"Pardon me, Caius Cassius. The enemies of Caesar shall say this;","Pardon me, Caius Cassius. Even Caesar’s enemies would say the same. From a friend, it’s a cool assessment—no more than that."
"I blame you not for praising Caesar so. But what compact mean you to have with us? Will you be pricked in number of our friends? Or shall we on, and not depend on you?","I don’t blame you for praising Caesar like this, but what agreement do you intend to reach with us? Will you be counted as our friend, or should we proceed without depending on you?"
Swayed from the point by looking down on Caesar. Friends am I with you all and love you all Upon this hope: that you shall give me reasons Why and wherein Caesar was dangerous.,"I took your hands in friendship, but, indeed, I was distracted when I looked down at Caesar. I am friends with you all and love you all, on one condition—that you prove to me that Caesar was dangerous."
"Our reasons are so full of good regard That were you, Antony, the son of Caesar, You should be satisfied.","Without that proof, this would’ve been a savage action! Our reasons are so well considered that even if you, Antony, were Caesar’s son, you would be satisfied with them."
"That’s all I seek. And am moreover suitor that I may And in the pulpit, as becomes a friend, Speak in the order of his funeral.","That’s all I ask—and that you let me carry his body to the marketplace and, as a friend ought to do, stand on the platform and give a proper funeral oration."
"You shall, Mark Antony.","You may, Mark Antony."
"Brutus, a word with you. (aside to BRUTUS) You know not what you do. That Antony speak in his funeral. Know you how much the people may be moved By that which he will utter?","Brutus, may I have a word with you? (speaking so that only BRUTUS can hear) You don’t know what you’re doing. Don’t let Antony speak at his funeral. Don’t you know how much the people could be affected by what he says?"
(aside to CASSIUS)    By your pardon. And show the reason of our Caesar’s death.,"(speaking so that only CASSIUS can hear) With your permission, I’ll stand on the platform first and explain the reason for Caesar’s death."
"What Antony shall speak, I will protest, He speaks by leave and by permission, And that we are contented Caesar shall It shall advantage more than do us wrong.","What Antony says, I’ll announce, he says only by our permission and by our conviction that Caesar should be honored with all the usual and lawful ceremonies. It’ll help us more than hurt us."
(aside to BRUTUS) I know not what may fall. I like it not.,(speaking so that only BRUTUS can hear) I’m worried about the outcome of his speech. I don’t like this plan.
"Mark Antony, here, take you Caesar’s body. You shall not in your funeral speech blame us, And say you do ’t by our permission. Else shall you not have any hand at all About his funeral. And you shall speak In the same pulpit whereto I am going,","Mark Antony, take Caesar’s body. You will not blame us in your funeral speech, but will say all the good you want to about Caesar and that you do it by our permission. Otherwise, you’ll have no role at all in his funeral. And you’ll speak on the same platform as I do, after I’m done."
Be it so. I do desire no more.,So be it. I don’t want anything more.
"Prepare the body then, and follow us.","Prepare the body, then, and follow us."
"O, pardon me, thou bleeding piece of earth, Thou art the ruins of the noblest man That ever livèd in the tide of times. Woe to the hand that shed this costly blood! Over thy wounds now do I prophesy— To beg the voice and utterance of my tongue— A curse shall light upon the limbs of men.","Oh, pardon me, you bleeding corpse, for speaking politely and acting mildly with these butchers! You are what’s left of the noblest man that ever lived. Pity the hand that shed this valuable blood. Over your wounds—which, like speechless mouths, open their red lips, as though to beg me to speak—I predict that a curse will fall upon the bodies of men."
"Domestic fury and fierce civil strife Shall cumber all the parts of Italy. And dreadful objects so familiar, That mothers shall but smile when they behold Their infants quartered with the hands of war, All pity choked with custom of fell deeds, With Ate by his side come hot from hell, Shall in these confines with a monarch’s voice Cry “Havoc!” and let slip the dogs of war, That this foul deed shall smell above the earth","Fierce civil war will paralyze all of Italy. Blood and destruction will be so common and familiar that mothers will merely smile when their infants are cut to pieces by the hands of war. People’s capacity for sympathy will grow tired and weak from the sheer quantity of cruel deeds. And Caesar’s ghost, searching for revenge with the goddess Ate Ate is the Greek goddess of discord and vengeance. Ate by his side, just up from Hell, will cry in the voice of a king, “Havoc!” and unleash the dogs of war. This foul deed will stink up to the sky with men’s corpses, which will beg to be buried."
"You serve Octavius Caesar, do you not?","You serve Octavius Caesar, right?"
"I do, Mark Antony.","I do, Mark Antony."
Caesar did write for him to come to Rome.,Caesar wrote for him to come to Rome.
He did receive his letters and is coming. (sees CAESAR’s body) O Caesar!—,"He received Caesar’s letters, and he is coming. He told me to say to you—(seeing CAESAR's body) Oh, Caesar!—"
"Thy heart is big. Get thee apart and weep. Passion, I see, is catching, for mine eyes, Seeing those beads of sorrow stand in thine,","Your heart is big; go ahead and weep. Grief seems to be contagious, for my eyes, seeing the tears in yours, began to fill. Is your master coming?"
He lies tonight within seven leagues of Rome.,He rests tonight within twenty-one miles of Rome.
"Post back with speed, and tell him what hath chanced. Here is a mourning Rome, a dangerous Rome, No Rome of safety for Octavius yet. Thou shalt not back till I have borne this corse Into the marketplace. There shall I try, In my oration, how the people take The cruèl issue of these bloody men. To young Octavius of the state of things. Lend me your hand.","Report back to him fast and tell him what has happened. This is now a Rome in mourning, a dangerous Rome. It’s not safe enough for Octavius yet. Hurry away and tell him so. No, wait, stay a minute. Don’t go back until I’ve carried the corpse into the marketplace. There I’ll use my speech to test what the people think of these bloody men’s cruel action. You’ll report back to young Octavius how they respond. Help me here."
We will be satisfied! Let us be satisfied!,We want answers. Give us answers.
"Then follow me and give me audience, friends. —Cassius, go you into the other street And part the numbers. Those that will follow Cassius, go with him, And public reasons shall be renderèd Of Caesar’s death.","Then follow me and listen to my speech, friends. Cassius, go to the next street and divide the crowd. Let those who will hear me speak stay. Lead those away who will follow you, and we’ll explain publicly the reasons for Caesar’s death."
I will hear Brutus speak.,I’ll listen to Brutus.
I will hear Cassius and compare their reasons,"I’ll listen to Cassius, and we will compare their reasons."
The noble Brutus is ascended. Silence!,Quiet! Noble Brutus has mounted the platform.
"Be patient till the last. Romans, countrymen, and lovers! Hear me for my cause, and be silent that you may hear. Believe me for mine honor, and have respect to mine honor that you may believe. Censure me in your wisdom, and awake your senses that you may the better judge. If there be any in this assembly, any dear friend of Caesar’s, to him I say that Brutus' love to Caesar was no less than his. If then that friend demand why Brutus rose against Caesar, this is my answer: not that I loved Caesar less, but that I loved Rome more.","Be patient until I finish. Romans, countrymen, and friends! Listen to my reasons and be silent so you can hear. Believe me on my honor and keep my honor in mind, so you may believe me. Be wise when you criticize me and keep your minds alert so you can judge me fairly. If there’s anyone in this assembly, any dear friend of Caesar’s, I say to him that my love for Caesar was no less than his. If, then, that friend demands to know why I rose up against Caesar, this is my answer: it’s not that I loved Caesar less, but that I loved Rome more."
"Had you rather Caesar were living and die all slaves, than that Caesar were dead, to live all free men? As Caesar loved me, I weep for him. As he was fortunate, I rejoice at it. As he was valiant, I honor him. But, as he was ambitious, I slew him. There is tears for his love, joy for his fortune, honor for his valor, and death for his ambition. Who is here so base that would be a bondman? If any, speak—for him have I offended. Who is here so rude that would not be a Roman? If any, speak—for him have I offended. Who is here so vile that will not love his country? If any, speak—for him have I offended. I pause for a reply.","Would you rather that Caesar were living and we would all go to our graves as slaves, or that Caesar were dead and we all lived as free men? I weep for Caesar in that he was good to me. I rejoice in his good fortune. I honor him for being brave. But his ambition—for that, I killed him. There are tears for his love, joy for his fortune, honor for his bravery, and death for his ambition. Who here is so low that he wants to be a slave? If there are any, speak, for it is he whom I’ve offended. Who here is so barbarous that he doesn’t want to be a Roman? If there are any, speak, for it is he whom I’ve offended. Who here is so vile that he doesn’t love his country? If there are any, speak, for it is he whom I have offended. I will pause for a reply."
"None, Brutus, none.","No one, Brutus, no one."
"Then none have I offended. I have done no more to Caesar than you shall do to Brutus. The question of his death is enrolled in the Capitol. His glory not extenuated wherein he was worthy, nor his offenses enforced for which he suffered death.","Then I have offended no one. I’ve done no more to Caesar than you will do to me. The reasons for his death are recorded in the Capitol. His glory has not been diminished where he earned it, nor have those offenses for which he was killed been exaggerated."
"Here comes his body, mourned by Mark Antony, who, though he had no hand in his death, shall receive the benefit of his dying—a place in the commonwealth—as which of you shall not? With this I depart: that, as I slew my best lover for the good of Rome, I have the same dagger for myself when it shall please my country to need my death.","Here comes his body, mourned by Mark Antony, who, though he had no part in the killing, will benefit from his death—receiving a share in the commonwealth, as you all will. With these words I leave. Just as I killed my best friend for the good of Rome, so will I kill myself when my country requires my death."
"Live, Brutus! Live, live!","Live, Brutus! Live, live!"
Bring him with triumph home unto his house!,Let’s carry him in triumph to his house!
Give him a statue with his ancestors!,"Let’s build a statue of him, near those of his ancestors!"
Let him be Caesar!,Let him become Caesar!
Caesar’s better parts Shall be crowned in Brutus!,"Caesar’s better qualities exist in Brutus, and we will crown him."
We’ll bring him to his house with shouts and clamors.,We’ll bring him to his house with shouts and celebration!
My countrymen—,My countrymen—
"Peace, silence! Brutus speaks.",Silence! Brutus speaks.
"Peace, ho!",Quiet there!
"Good countrymen, let me depart alone. And, for my sake, stay here with Antony. Tending to Caesar’s glories, which Mark Antony By our permission is allowed to make. I do entreat you, not a man depart, Save I alone, till Antony have spoke.","Good countrymen, let me leave alone. I want you to stay here with Antony to pay respects to Caesar’s corpse and listen to Antony’s speech about Caesar’s glories, which he gives with our permission. I ask that none of you leave, except myself, until Antony has finished."
"Stay, ho! And let us hear Mark Antony.",Let’s stay and hear Mark Antony.
"Let him go up into the public chair. We’ll hear him.—Noble Antony, go up.","Let him mount the pulpit. We’ll listen to him. Noble Antony, mount the podium."
"For Brutus' sake, I am beholding to you. (ascends the pulpit)","For Brutus’s sake, I am indebted to you. (he steps up into the pulpit)"
What does he say of Brutus?,What does he say about Brutus?
He says for Brutus' sake He finds himself beholding to us all.,He says that for Brutus’s sake he finds himself indebted to us all.
'Twere best he speak no harm of Brutus here.,He’d better not speak badly of Brutus here.
This Caesar was a tyrant.,Caesar was a tyrant.
"Nay, that’s certain. We are blest that Rome is rid of him.",That’s for sure. We’re lucky that Rome is rid of him.
Peace! Let us hear what Antony can say.,Quiet! Let’s hear what Antony has to say.
You gentle Romans—,You gentle Romans—
"Peace, ho! Let us hear him.",Quiet there! Let us hear him.
"Friends, Romans, countrymen, lend me your ears. I come to bury Caesar, not to praise him. The evil that men do lives after them; So let it be with Caesar. The noble Brutus Hath told you Caesar was ambitious. If it were so, it was a grievous fault, And grievously hath Caesar answered it. For Brutus is an honorable man; So are they all, all honorable men— Come I to speak in Caesar’s funeral. He was my friend, faithful and just to me. And Brutus is an honorable man. He hath brought many captives home to Rome Whose ransoms did the general coffers fill.","Friends, Romans, countrymen, give me your attention. I have come here to bury Caesar, not to praise him. The evil that men do is remembered after their deaths, but the good is often buried with them. It might as well be the same with Caesar. The noble Brutus told you that Caesar was ambitious. If that’s true, it’s a serious fault, and Caesar has paid seriously for it. With the permission of Brutus and the others—for Brutus is an honorable man; they are all honorable men—I have come here to speak at Caesar’s funeral. He was my friend, he was faithful and just to me. But Brutus says he was ambitious, and Brutus is an honorable man. He brought many captives home to Rome whose ransoms brought wealth to the city."
"Did this in Caesar seem ambitious? Ambition should be made of sterner stuff. Yet Brutus says he was ambitious, And Brutus is an honorable man. You all did see that on the Lupercal Which he did thrice refuse. Was this ambition? Yet Brutus says he was ambitious, And, sure, he is an honorable man. I speak not to disprove what Brutus spoke, You all did love him once, not without cause. What cause withholds you then to mourn for him? O judgment! Thou art fled to brutish beasts, And men have lost their reason. Bear with me. And I must pause till it come back to me. (weeps)","Is this the work of an ambitious man? When the poor cried, Caesar cried too. Ambition shouldn’t be so soft. Yet Brutus says he was ambitious, and Brutus is an honorable man. You all saw that on the Lupercal feast day I offered him a king’s crown three times, and he refused it three times. Was this ambition? Yet Brutus says he was ambitious. And, no question, Brutus is an honorable man. I am not here to disprove what Brutus has said, but to say what I know. You all loved him once, and not without reason. Then what reason holds you back from mourning him now? Men have become brutish beasts and lost their reason! Bear with me. My heart is in the coffin there with Caesar, and I must pause until it returns to me. (he weeps)"
Methinks there is much reason in his sayings.,I think there’s a lot of sense in what he says.
"If thou consider rightly of the matter, Caesar has had great wrong.","If you think about it correctly, Caesar has suffered a great wrong."
"Has he, masters?","Has he, sirs? I’m worried there will be someone worse to replace him."
Marked ye his words? He would not take the crown. Therefore ’tis certain he was not ambitious.,Did you hear Antony? Caesar wouldn’t take the crown. Therefore it’s certain that he wasn’t ambitious.
"If it be found so, some will dear abide it.","If it turns out he wasn’t, certain people are going to get it."
Poor soul! His eyes are red as fire with weeping.,Poor man! Antony’s eyes are fiery red from crying.
There’s not a nobler man in Rome than Antony.,There isn’t a nobler man than Antony in all of Rome.
Now mark him. He begins again to speak.,"Now listen, he’s going to speak again."
"But yesterday the word of Caesar might Have stood against the world. Now lies he there, And none so poor to do him reverence. Your hearts and minds to mutiny and rage, I should do Brutus wrong, and Cassius wrong— Who, you all know, are honorable men. I will not do them wrong. I rather choose Than I will wrong such honorable men. But here’s a parchment with the seal of Caesar. I found it in his closet. 'Tis his will. Let but the commons hear this testament— And they would go and kiss dead Caesar’s wounds And dip their napkins in his sacred blood, Yea, beg a hair of him for memory, And, dying, mention it within their wills, Unto their issue.","Only yesterday the word of Caesar might have stood against the world. Now he lies there worth nothing, and no one is so humble as to show him respect. Oh, sirs, if I stirred your hearts and minds to mutiny and rage, I would offend Brutus and Cassius, who, you all know, are honorable men. I will not do them wrong. I would rather wrong the dead, and wrong myself and you, than wrong such honorable men. But here’s a paper with Caesar’s seal on it. I found it in his room—it’s his will. If you could only hear this testament—which, excuse me, I don’t intend to read aloud—you would kiss dead Caesar’s wounds and dip your handkerchiefs in his sacred blood, and beg for a lock of hair to remember him by. And when you died, you would mention the handkerchief or the hair in your will, bequeathing it to your heirs like a rich legacy."
"We’ll hear the will. Read it, Mark Antony!","We want to hear the will. Read it, Mark Antony."
"The will, the will! We will hear Caesar’s will.","The will, the will! We want to hear Caesar’s will."
"Have patience, gentle friends. I must not read it. You are not wood, you are not stones, but men. And, being men, bearing the will of Caesar, It will inflame you, it will make you mad. 'Tis good you know not that you are his heirs.","Be patient, gentle friends, I must not read it. It isn’t proper for you to know how much Caesar loved you. You aren’t wood, you aren’t stones—you’re men. And, being men, the contents of Caesar’s will would enrage you. It’s better that you don’t know you’re his heirs, for if you knew, just imagine what would come of it!"
"Read the will. We’ll hear it, Antony. You shall read us the will, Caesar’s will.","Read the will. We want to hear it, Antony. You have to read us the will, Caesar’s will."
Will you be patient? Will you stay awhile? I have o'ershot myself to tell you of it. Whose daggers have stabbed Caesar. I do fear it.,Will you be patient? Will you wait awhile? I’ve said too much in telling you of it. I’m afraid that I wrong the honorable men whose daggers have stabbed Caesar.
They were traitors! “Honorable men”!,They were traitors. “Honorable men!”
The will! The testament!,The will! The testament!
"They were villains, murderers. The will! Read the will!","They were villains, murderers. The will! Read the will!"
"Then make a ring about the corpse of Caesar, And let me show you him that made the will. Shall I descend? And will you give me leave?","You force me to read the will, then? Then make a circle around Caesar’s corpse, and let me show you the man who made this will. Shall I come down? Will you let me?"
Come down.,Come down.
Descend.,Descend.
You shall have leave.,We’ll let you.
A ring!,Make a circle; stand around him.
Stand from the hearse. Stand from the body.,Stand away from the hearse. Stand away from the body.
"Room for Antony, most noble Antony!","Make room for Antony, most noble Antony!"
"Nay, press not so upon me. Stand far off.","No, don’t press up against me. Stand further away."
Stand back. Room! Bear back.,Stand back. Give him room.
"If you have tears, prepare to shed them now. The first time ever Caesar put it on. 'Twas on a summer’s evening in his tent, That day he overcame the Nervii. Look, in this place ran Cassius' dagger through. Through this the well-belovèd Brutus stabbed. And as he plucked his cursèd steel away, Mark how the blood of Caesar followed it, As rushing out of doors, to be resolved For Brutus, as you know, was Caesar’s angel. Judge, O you gods, how dearly Caesar loved him! This was the most unkindest cut of all. For when the noble Caesar saw him stab, Quite vanquished him. Then burst his mighty heart, And, in his mantle muffling up his face, Even at the base of Pompey’s statue, Which all the while ran blood, great Caesar fell. Then I, and you, and all of us fell down, Whilst bloody treason flourished over us. Oh, now you weep, and, I perceive, you feel The dint of pity. These are gracious drops. Our Caesar’s vesture wounded? Look you here, Here is himself, marred, as you see, with traitors. (lifts up CAESAR's mantle)","If you have tears, prepare to shed them now. You all know this cloak. I remember the first time Caesar ever put it on. It was a summer’s evening; he was in his tent. It was the day he overcame the Nervii warriors. Look, here’s where Cassius’s dagger pierced it. See the wound that Casca made. Through this hole beloved Brutus stabbed. And when he pulled out his cursed dagger, see how Caesar’s blood came with it, as if rushing out a door to see if it was really Brutus who was knocking so rudely. For Brutus, as you know, was Caesar’s angel. The gods know how dearly Caesar loved him! This was the most unkind cut of all. For when the noble Caesar saw him stab, he understood his beloved Brutus’s ingratitude; it was stronger than the violence of traitors, and it defeated him, bursting his mighty heart. And at the base of Pompey’s statue, with his cloak covering his face, which was dripping with blood the whole time, great Caesar fell. Oh, what a fall it was, my countrymen! Then you and I and all of us fell down, while bloody treason triumphed. Oh, now you weep, and I sense that you feel pity. These are gracious tears. But if it overwhelms you to look at Caesar’s wounded cloak, how will you feel, kind men, now? Look at this, here is the man—scarred, as you can see, by traitors. (he lifts up CAESAR's cloak)"
O piteous spectacle!,"Oh, what a sad sight!"
O noble Caesar!,"Oh, noble Caesar!"
O woeful day!,"Oh, sad day!"
"O traitors, villains!","Oh, traitors, villains!"
O most bloody sight!,"Oh, most bloody sight!"
We will be revenged.,We will get revenge.
Revenge! About! Seek! Burn! Fire! Kill! Slay! Let not a traitor live!,Revenge! Let’s go after them! Seek! Burn! Set fire! Kill! Slay! Leave no traitors alive!
"Stay, countrymen.","Wait, countrymen."
Peace there! Hear the noble Antony.,Quiet there! Listen to the noble Antony.
We’ll hear him. We’ll follow him. We’ll die with him.,"We’ll listen to him, we’ll follow him, we’ll die with him."
"Good friends, sweet friends! Let me not stir you up To such a sudden flood of mutiny. They that have done this deed are honorable. That made them do it. They are wise and honorable, And will, no doubt, with reasons answer you. I come not, friends, to steal away your hearts. I am no orator, as Brutus is, That love my friend. And that they know full well That gave me public leave to speak of him. For I have neither wit nor words nor worth, Action nor utterance nor the power of speech, I tell you that which you yourselves do know, Show you sweet Caesar’s wounds, poor poor dumb mouths, And bid them speak for me. But were I Brutus, And Brutus Antony, there were an Antony In every wound of Caesar that should move The stones of Rome to rise and mutiny.","Good friends, sweet friends, don’t let me stir you up to such a sudden mutiny. Those who have done this deed are honorable. I don’t know what private grudges they had that made them do it. They’re wise and honorable, and will no doubt give you reasons for it. I haven’t come to steal your loyalty, friends. I’m no orator, as Brutus is. I’m only, as you know, a plain, blunt man who loved his friend, and the men who let me speak know this well. I have neither cleverness nor rhetorical skill nor the authority nor gesture nor eloquence nor the power of speech to stir men up. I just speak directly. I tell you what you already know. I show you sweet Caesar’s wounds—poor, speechless mouths!—and make them speak for me. But if I were Brutus and Brutus were me, then I’d stir you up, and install in each of Caesar’s wounds the kind of voice that could convince even stones to rise up and mutiny."
We’ll mutiny.,We’ll mutiny.
We’ll burn the house of Brutus.,We’ll burn Brutus’s house.
"Away, then! Come, seek the conspirators.","Let’s go, then! Come, find the conspirators!"
"Yet hear me, countrymen. Yet hear me speak.","Wait, and listen to me, countrymen."
"Peace, ho! Hear Antony. Most noble Antony!",Quiet! Wait! Listen to Antony. Most noble Antony!
"Why, friends, you go to do you know not what. Wherein hath Caesar thus deserved your loves? Alas, you know not. I must tell you then.","Why, friends, you don’t even know what you’re doing yet. What has Caesar done to deserve your love? Alas, you don’t know. I must tell you then. You’ve forgotten the will I told you about."
Most true. The will! Let’s stay and hear the will.,Yes! The will! Let’s stay and hear the will!
"Here is the will, and under Caesar’s seal To every Roman citizen he gives— To every several man—seventy-five drachmas.","Here’s the will, written under Caesar’s seal. To every Roman citizen he gives—to every individual man—seventy-five drachmas."
Most noble Caesar! We’ll revenge his death.,Most noble Caesar! We’ll revenge his death.
O royal Caesar!,"Oh, royal Caesar!"
Hear me with patience.,Listen to me patiently.
"Peace, ho!","Quiet, there!"
"Moreover, he hath left you all his walks, His private arbors and new-planted orchards, On this side Tiber. He hath left them you To walk abroad and recreate yourselves. Here was a Caesar! When comes such another?","Also, he’s left you all his walkways—in his private gardens and newly planted orchards—on this side of the Tiber River. He’s left them to you and to your heirs forever—public pleasures in which you will be able to stroll and relax. Here was a Caesar! When will there be another like him?"
"Never, never.—Come, away, away! We’ll burn his body in the holy place, Take up the body.","Never, never. Let’s go! We’ll burn his body in the holy place and use the brands to set the traitors' houses on fire. Take up the body."
Go fetch fire.,We’ll start a fire.
Pluck down benches.,We’ll use benches for wood—
"Pluck down forms, windows, anything.","And windowsills, anything."
"Now let it work. Mischief, thou art afoot.","Now, let it work. Trouble, you have begun—take whatever course you choose!"
"How now, fellow?","What’s up, my man?"
"Sir, Octavius is already come to Rome.","Sir, Octavius has already arrived in Rome."
Where is he?,Where is he?
He and Lepidus are at Caesar’s house.,He and Lepidus are at Caesar’s house.
And thither will I straight to visit him. And in this mood will give us anything.,"I will go straight to visit him. I ask for him, and he comes. Fortune is happy today and, in this mood, will give us anything we want."
"I heard him say, Brutus and Cassius Are rid like madmen through the gates of Rome.",I heard Octavius say that Brutus and Cassius have ridden like madmen through the gates of Rome.
Belike they had some notice of the people,They probably received warning about how much I stirred up the people. Take me to Octavius.
"I dreamt tonight that I did feast with Caesar, And things unlucky charge my fantasy. I have no will to wander forth of doors, Yet something leads me forth.","I dreamed last night that I feasted with Caesar, and unlucky signs overwhelmed my imagination. I have no desire to go outside, yet something leads me there."
What is your name?,What’s your name?
Whither are you going?,Where are you going?
Where do you dwell?,Where do you live?
Are you a married man or a bachelor?,Are you a married man or a bachelor?
Answer every man directly.,"Answer all of us, now."
"Ay, and briefly.","Yes, and be brief."
"Ay, and wisely.","Yes, and be wise."
"Ay, and truly, you were best.","Yes, and be truthful, if you know what’s good for you."
"What is my name? Whither am I going? Where do I dwell? Am I a married man or a bachelor? Then, to answer every man directly and briefly, wisely and truly—wisely I say, I am a bachelor.","What’s my name? Where am I going? Where do I live? Am I a married man or a bachelor? Then, to answer every man briefly, wisely, and truthfully—wisely I say, I am a bachelor."
"That’s as much as to say they are fools that marry. You’ll bear me a bang for that, I fear. Proceed, directly.","You imply that married men are fools. You’ll get a blow from me for that, I think. Go on with what you were saying—right this instant."
"Directly, I am going to Caesar’s funeral.","Right this instant, I’m going to Caesar’s funeral."
As a friend or an enemy?,As a friend or an enemy?
As a friend.,As a friend.
That matter is answered directly.,He answered that question straight.
For your dwelling—briefly.,"As for where you live, tell us quickly—get to the point."
"Briefly, I dwell by the Capitol.","Getting right to the point, I live near the Capitol."
"Your name, sir, truly.","Tell us your name, sir, truthfully."
"Truly, my name is Cinna.","Truthfully, my name is Cinna."
Tear him to pieces. He’s a conspirator.,Tear him to pieces. He’s a conspirator.
I am Cinna the poet. I am Cinna the poet.,"I am Cinna the poet, I am Cinna the poet!"
Tear him for his bad verses! Tear him for his bad verses!,"Tear him apart for his bad verses, tear him up!"
I am not Cinna the conspirator.,I’m not Cinna the conspirator.
It is no matter. His name’s Cinna. Pluck but his name out of his heart and turn him going.,It doesn’t matter. His name’s Cinna. Pull only his name out of his heart and let him go.
"Tear him, tear him!","Tear him apart, tear him up!"
"Come, brands, ho, firebrands. To Brutus', to Cassius', burn all. Some to Decius' house and some to Casca’s. Some to Ligarius'. Away, go!","Come, firebrands, over here! To Brutus’s, to Cassius’s, let’s burn them all. Some of you go to Decius’s house and some to Casca’s. Some to Ligarius’s. Go!"
"These many, then, shall die. Their names are pricked.","These ones, then, will be assassinated. Their names are marked."
"(to LEPIDUS) Your brother too must die. Consent you, Lepidus?","(to LEPIDUS) Your brother has to die too. Do you agree, Lepidus?"
I do consent—,I agree—
"Prick him down, Antony.","Put a mark next to his name too, Antony."
"Who is your sister’s son, Mark Antony.","On the condition that your sister’s son, Publius, also must die, Mark Antony."
"He shall not live. Look, with a spot I damn him. But, Lepidus, go you to Caesar’s house. Fetch the will hither, and we shall determine","He will die. See—I’ve sealed his fate with this mark next to his name. But, Lepidus, go to Caesar’s house. Bring his will here, and we’ll figure out a way to reduce his bequests to the people."
"What, shall I find you here?",Will you be here when I return?
"Or here, or at the Capitol.",Either here or at the Capitol.
"This is a slight, unmeritable man, Meet to be sent on errands. Is it fit, One of the three to share it?","He’s an unremarkable man, fit only to be sent on errands. Does it really make sense, once we divide the world into three parts, that he should be one of the three rulers?"
So you thought him. And took his voice who should be pricked to die In our black sentence and proscription.,"You thought it made sense, and you listened to him about who should be marked to die in these harsh death sentences."
"Octavius, I have seen more days than you. To ease ourselves of divers slanderous loads, He shall but bear them as the ass bears gold, To groan and sweat under the business, Either led or driven, as we point the way. Then take we down his load and turn him off, Like to the empty ass, to shake his ears And graze in commons.","Octavius, I’m older than you are. And although we’re giving these honors to this man so that he shares some of the blame for what we’re doing, he’ll carry these honors like a jackass carries gold—groaning and sweating under the load, either led or pushed, as we direct him. Once he’s carried our treasure where we want it, we’ll free him of the load and turn him loose like a jackass, to shake his ears and graze in the public pastures."
"You may do your will, But he’s a tried and valiant soldier.","You can do what you want, but he’s an experienced and honorable soldier."
"I do appoint him store of provender. It is a creature that I teach to fight, To wind, to stop, to run directly on, His corporal motion governed by my spirit, He must be taught and trained and bid go forth, A barren-spirited fellow, one that feeds On objects, arts, and imitations, Which, out of use and staled by other men, But as a property. And now, Octavius, Listen great things. Brutus and Cassius Are levying powers. We must straight make head. Therefore let our alliance be combined,","So is my horse, Octavius, and for that reason I give him all the hay he wants. But my horse is a creature that I teach to fight—to turn, to stop, to run in a straight line. I govern the motion of his body. And in some ways, Lepidus is just like that. He has to be taught and trained and told to go forward. He’s an empty man, who pays attention to fashions and tastes that other men took up and got tired of long ago. Don’t think about Lepidus except as a means to an end. And now, Octavius, listen to more important things. Brutus and Cassius are raising armies. We have to raise our own immediately. So, we should combine forces and organize our allies, pull together our friends, and stretch our resources as far as they’ll go."
"And let us presently go sit in council How covert matters may be best disclosed, And open perils surest answered.",Let’s immediately organize a council to discuss the best way to find out their secrets and the safest way to confront the threats we’re already faced with.
"Let us do so. For we are at the stake And some that smile have in their hearts, I fear, Millions of mischiefs.","Let’s do that, because we’re hemmed in by many enemies. And even some of the people who smile at us are in fact plotting against us, I’m afraid."
"Stand, ho!",Stop.
"Give the word, ho, and stand.",Pass on the command to halt!
"What now, Lucillius? Is Cassius near?","What’s happening now, Lucillius? Is Cassius nearby?"
"He is at hand, and Pindarus is come","He’s nearby, and Pindarus has come to salute you on behalf of his master."
"He greets me well.—Your master, Pindarus, In his own change or by ill officers Hath given me some worthy cause to wish Things done, undone. But if he be at hand","He sends his greetings through a good man. Your master, Pindarus, either because he’s changed his mind or been influenced by bad officers, has made me wish we hadn’t done some of the things we did. If he’s nearby, I want an explanation."
"I do not doubt But that my noble master will appear Such as he is, full of regard and honor.",I have no doubt that my noble master will prove himself to be what he is: honorable and noble.
"He is not doubted.—A word, Lucillius. (takes LUCILLIUS aside)","I don’t doubt him. Can I have a word with you, Lucillius? (takes LUCILLIUS aside) Tell me how Cassius treated you. Put my mind at rest."
With courtesy and with respect enough. But not with such familiar instances Nor with such free and friendly conference As he hath used of old.,"He received me with courtesy and sufficient respect, but not with affection, nor with as much open and friendly conversation as he once greeted me."
"Thou hast described When love begins to sicken and decay, It useth an enforcèd ceremony. There are no tricks in plain and simple faith. But hollow men, like horses hot at hand,","You’ve described a warm friend who’s cooling off. Remember this, Lucillius. When a friend starts to get sick of you, he treats you artificially. Plain and simple loyalty doesn’t make anyone act phony. But insincere men, like horses who are too lively at the start of a race, make a big show of their spirit."
"But when they should endure the bloody spur, They fall their crests and, like deceitful jades, Sink in the trial. Comes his army on?","But when push comes to shove, they droop like those horses that are all show and slow to a crawl. Is his army approaching?"
They mean this night in Sardis to be quartered. Are come with Cassius.,"They plan to spend the night in Sardis. The larger part, the main body of cavalry, are coming with Cassius."
Hark! He is arrived. March gently on to meet him.,Look! He’s arrived. March to meet him at a dignified pace.
"Stand, ho!",Halt.
"Stand, ho! Speak the word along.",Halt! Pass the order along.
Stand!,Halt!
Stand!,Halt!
Stand!,Halt!
"Most noble brother, you have done me wrong.","Most noble brother, you have done me wrong."
"Judge me, you gods! Wrong I mine enemies?",Let the gods judge me! Do I mistreat even my enemies? No. So how could I possibly wrong a brother?
"Brutus, this sober form of yours hides wrongs. And when you do them—","Brutus, your sober expression is a mask to hide the fact that you’ve wronged me. And when you do—"
"Cassius, be content. Speak your griefs softly. I do know you well. Before the eyes of both our armies here, Let us not wrangle. Bid them move away. Then in my tent, Cassius, enlarge your griefs, And I will give you audience.","Cassius, calm down. We know each other well, and you can speak your grievances quietly. Let’s not argue here in front of both our armies, which ought to see nothing but love between us. Order them to move back. Then, in my tent, you can elaborate on your complaints, and I’ll listen."
"Pindarus, Bid our commanders lead their charges off","Pindarus, order our commanders to lead their charges a little ways away from this ground."
"Lucillius, do you the like. And let no man Come to our tent till we have done our conference. Let Lucius and Titinius guard our door.","Lucillius, you do the same, and don’t allow anyone to come into our tent until we’ve finished our conference. Have Lucius and Titinius guard the door."
"That you have wronged me doth appear in this: You have condemned and noted Lucius Pella For taking bribes here of the Sardians, Wherein my letters, praying on his side","My evidence that you have wronged me is that you condemned and disgraced Lucius Pella for taking bribes here from the Sardinians, and you ignored my letters, where I argued that he was innocent; I know the man."
You wronged yourself to write in such a case.,You wronged yourself to write on behalf of such a man.
In such a time as this it is not meet That every nice offense should bear his comment.,"In a time like this, it doesn’t make sense to criticize every offense."
"Let me tell you, Cassius, you yourself To sell and mart your offices for gold To undeservers.","I’ll tell you, Cassius, you yourself have been called greedy and been accused of giving your positions to undeserving men in exchange for gold."
"I “an itching palm”! You know that you are Brutus that speak this, Or, by the gods, this speech were else your last.","Me, “greedy”! You know, if you were anyone other than Brutus, that speech would be your last."
And chastisement doth therefore hide his head.,"The name of Cassius gives credit to these corrupt actions, and so they go unpunished."
Chastisement!,Unpunished!
"Remember March, the ides of March remember. Did not great Julius bleed for justice' sake?","Remember March, March th. Didn’t great Caesar bleed for the sake of justice?"
"And not for justice? What, shall one of us That struck the foremost man of all this world But for supporting robbers, shall we now Contaminate our fingers with base bribes, For so much trash as may be graspèd thus? I had rather be a dog and bay the moon Than such a Roman.",Who among us stabbed him for any cause but justice? What—did one of us strike down the most powerful man in the world in order to support robbers? Should we now dirty our fingers with lowly bribes and sell the mighty offices that we hold for whatever money we can get our hands on? I’d rather be a dog and howl at the moon than be that kind of Roman.
"Brutus, bait not me. I’ll not endure it. You forget yourself Older in practice, abler than yourself To make conditions.","Brutus, do not provoke me. I will not take it. You’re forgetting yourself when you back me into a corner. I’m a soldier, more experienced than you, and better able to give orders."
"Go to. You are not, Cassius.","Get lost! You are not, Cassius."
I am.,I am.
I say you are not.,I say you’re not.
"Urge me no more, I shall forget myself. Have mind upon your health, tempt me no further.","Don’t provoke me any further or I’ll forget to restrain myself. If you care about your health, you won’t push me any further."
"Away, slight man!","Leave, you little man."
Is ’t possible?,Is this possible?
Must I give way and room to your rash choler? Shall I be frighted when a madman stares?,"Listen to me, for I have something to tell you. Am I required to indulge your rash anger? Does a madman scare me when he stares at me?"
"O ye gods, ye gods, must I endure all this?","Oh gods, oh gods! Must I endure all this?"
"“All this”? Ay, more. Fret till your proud heart break. And make your bondmen tremble. Must I budge? Must I observe you? Must I stand and crouch Under your testy humor? By the gods, You shall digest the venom of your spleen, I’ll use you for my mirth, yea, for my laughter, When you are waspish.","“All this”? Yes, and more. Go ahead—rage till your proud heart breaks. Show your slaves how mad you are, and make your servants tremble. But me—am I going to cower at you and your irritable moods? You’ll have to swallow your own poison till it makes you burst before I’m going to respond; from now on, I’ll make you the butt of my jokes whenever you get sharp with me."
Is it come to this?,Has it come to this?
"You say you are a better soldier. Let it appear so. Make your vaunting true, I shall be glad to learn of noble men.","You say you’re a better soldier. Show it! Make your boasts come true, and I’ll be thrilled. I’m always happy to hear about brave men."
"You wrong me every way. You wrong me, Brutus. I said an elder soldier, not a better. Did I say “better”?","You wrong me in every way. You wrong me, Brutus. I said an older soldier, not a better one. Did I say “better”?"
"If you did, I care not.","If you did, I don’t care."
"When Caesar lived, he durst not thus have moved me.","When Caesar was alive, even he wouldn’t dare anger me like this."
"Peace, peace! You durst not so have tempted him.","Oh, be quiet. You wouldn’t have dared to tempt him so."
I durst not!,I wouldn’t have dared!
No.,No.
"What, durst not tempt him?",What? Not dared to tempt him?
For your life you durst not.,"You wouldn’t have dared, out of fear for your life."
Do not presume too much upon my love. I may do that I shall be sorry for.,Don’t take my love for granted. I might do something I’ll be sorry for.
"You have done that you should be sorry for. For I am armed so strong in honesty That they pass by me as the idle wind, Which I respect not. I did send to you For certain sums of gold, which you denied me, By heaven, I had rather coin my heart And drop my blood for drachmas than to wring From the hard hands of peasants their vile trash By any indirection. I did send Which you denied me. Was that done like Cassius? Should I have answered Caius Cassius so? When Marcus Brutus grows so covetous To lock such rascal counters from his friends, Dash him to pieces!","You’ve already done something you should be sorry for. Your threats don’t scare me, Cassius, because I’m so secure in my honesty and integrity that they pass me by like a weak breeze. I asked you for a certain amount of gold, which you wouldn’t give me. I myself can’t raise money by unethical means. I’d rather turn my heart into money and my drops of blood into coins than use crooked tactics to wring petty cash from the hardworking hands of peasants. I asked you for gold to pay my soldiers, and you wouldn’t give it to me. Was that the Caius Cassius that I knew? And would I have ever done that to you? If I ever get so greedy that I hoard such petty cash from my friends, may the gods dash me to pieces with their thunderbolts!"
I denied you not.,I didn’t refuse you.
You did.,You did.
"I did not. He was but a fool that brought My answer back. Brutus hath rived my heart. A friend should bear his friend’s infirmities,","I didn’t. The man who brought my answer to you was a fool. You have broken my heart. A friend should put up with his friend’s weaknesses, but you exaggerate mine."
"I do not, till you practice them on me.",I don’t until you practice them on me.
You love me not.,You don’t love me.
I do not like your faults.,I don’t like your faults.
A friendly eye could never see such faults.,A friend would never see those faults.
"A flatterer’s would not, though they do appear","No, a flatterer wouldn’t, even if the faults were as huge as Mount Olympus."
"Come, Antony, and young Octavius, come, Revenge yourselves alone on Cassius, For Cassius is aweary of the world— Hated by one he loves; braved by his brother; Set in a notebook, learned, and conned by rote To cast into my teeth. Oh, I could weep My spirit from mine eyes. (offers BRUTUS his bared dagger) There is my dagger. Dearer than Plutus' mine, richer than gold. If that thou beest a Roman, take it forth. I, that denied thee gold, will give my heart. Strike, as thou didst at Caesar. For I know Than ever thou lovedst Cassius.","Come, Antony and young Octavius! Get your revenge on Cassius, because Cassius has grown tired of the world. He’s hated by someone he loves, defied by his brother, rebuked like a servant, all his faults observed, catalogued in a notebook, read, and committed to memory so they can be thrown in his face. Oh, I could weep my soul right out of myself! There’s my dagger (he offers BRUTUS his unsheathed dagger), and here’s my bare chest. Inside it is a heart more valuable than Pluto’s Pluto is the god of the underworld, and Plutus is the god of wealth. The two are often confused or combined, as they are here. Pluto’s silver mine and richer than gold. If you’re a Roman, take my heart out. I, who denied you gold, will give you my heart. Strike as you did at Caesar, for I know even when you hated him the most, you still loved him better than you ever loved me."
"Sheathe your dagger. Be angry when you will, it shall have scope. Do what you will, dishonor shall be humor. O Cassius, you are yokèd with a lamb Who, much enforcèd, shows a hasty spark And straight is cold again.","Put away your dagger. Be angry whenever you like, it’s all right with me. Do whatever you want, and I’ll say your insults are just a bad mood. Oh, Cassius, you’re partners with a quiet lamb. My anger is like a flint striking—a brief spark, and then I’m cold again."
"Hath Cassius lived To be but mirth and laughter to his Brutus, When grief and blood ill-tempered vexeth him?",Have I lived this long only to be the butt of a joke whenever you’re angry or frustrated?
"When I spoke that, I was ill-tempered too.","When I said that, I was angry too."
Do you confess so much? Give me your hand.,"You admit it, then? Give me your hand."
And my heart too.,And my heart too.
O Brutus!,"Oh, Brutus!"
What’s the matter?,What’s the matter?
"Have not you love enough to bear with me, When that rash humor which my mother gave me","Do you have enough love for me to be patient when my bad temper, which I inherited from my mother, makes me forget how I should behave?"
"Yes, Cassius. And from henceforth When you are over-earnest with your Brutus, He’ll think your mother chides and leave you so.","Yes, Cassius. And from now on, when you get hot with me, I’ll assume it’s your mother speaking and leave it at that."
(within) Let me go in to see the generals. There is some grudge between 'em. 'Tis not meet,"(offstage) Let me in to see the generals. There’s a grudge between them, and it isn’t a good idea for them to be alone."
(within)    You shall not come to them.,(offstage) You can’t see them.
(within) Nothing but death shall stay me.,(offstage) You’d have to kill me to stop me.
How now? What’s the matter?,What’s this! What’s the matter?
"For shame, you generals! What do you mean? For I have seen more years, I’m sure, than ye.","You should be ashamed, generals! What do you think you’re doing? Love each other and be friends, like two such men should be. Listen to me, because I’m older than you, surely."
"Ha, ha, how vilely doth this cynic rhyme!",Ha ha! This man’s rhymes are terrible!
"(to POET) Get you hence, sirrah. Saucy fellow, hence!","(to POET) Get out of here, you! Get away, you rude fellow!"
"Bear with him, Brutus. 'Tis his fashion.","Be patient with him, Brutus. That’s just how he is."
"What should the wars do with these jigging fools? —Companion, hence!","I’ll humor him when he learns how to behave. What should we do with all these rhyming fools that follow us from post to post? Get out of here, my friend."
"Away, away, be gone.","Away, away, be gone."
"Lucillius and Titinius, bid the commanders Prepare to lodge their companies tonight.","Lucillius and Titinius, order the commanders to have the men camp for the night."
Immediately to us.,"And return to us immediately, bringing Messala with you."
"(calls off)    Lucius, a bowl of wine!","(calling offstage) Lucius, bring a bowl of wine."
I did not think you could have been so angry.,I didn’t think you could even be so angry.
"O Cassius, I am sick of many griefs.","Oh Cassius, I’m tired out by many sorrows."
Of your philosophy you make no use,You’re forgetting your Stoic The Stoics were philosophers who maintained that people should accept suffering without complaining. Stoic philosophy if you allow chance misfortunes to upset you.
No man bears sorrow better. Portia is dead.,No one bears sorrow better than me. Portia is dead.
"Ha, Portia?",Portia!
She is dead.,She is dead.
How ’scaped I killing when I crossed you so? Upon what sickness?,How did you manage not to kill me when we argued just now? What an irreplaceable and grievous loss! What sickness did she die of?
"Impatient of my absence, And grief that young Octavius with Mark Antony Have made themselves so strong—for with her death That tidings came—with this she fell distract","She was worried about my absence, and about the fact that young Octavius and Mark Antony have grown so strong—which I found out at the same time as the news of her death. She became full of despair and, when her attendants were away, swallowed burning coals."
And died so?,And that’s how she died?
Even so.,"Yes, like that."
O ye immortal gods!,"Oh, immortal gods!"
"Speak no more of her.—Give me a bowl of wine.— In this I bury all unkindness, Cassius. (drinks)","Don’t talk about her anymore. Give me a bowl of wine. With this toast I bury all bad feelings between us, Cassius. (he drinks)"
"Fill, Lucius, till the wine o'erswell the cup. I cannot drink too much of Brutus' love. (drinks)","My heart is thirsty for that noble promise. Fill my cup, Lucius, until the wine overflows it. I cannot drink too much of Brutus’s love. (he drinks)"
"Come in, Titinius.—Welcome, good Messala! And call in question our necessities.","Come in, Titinius! Welcome, good Messala. Now let’s sit closely around this candle and discuss our needs."
"Portia, art thou gone?","Portia, are you really gone?"
"No more, I pray you. —Messala, I have here receivèd letters That young Octavius and Mark Antony Bending their expedition toward Philippi.","No more about that, please. Messala, I have received these letters explaining that young Octavius and Mark Antony are rushing toward Philippi and bearing down upon us with a mighty power."
Myself have letters of the selfsame tenor.,I have received letters that say the same.
With what addition?,And anything else?
"That by proscription and bills of outlawry, Have put to death an hundred senators.","That with a series of legal writs, Octavius, Antony, and Lepidus have put a hundred senators to death."
"Therein our letters do not well agree. Mine speak of seventy senators that died By their proscriptions, Cicero being one.","On that point, our letters don’t agree. My letters say only seventy senators were killed, one being Cicero."
Cicero one?,Cicero too?
"Cicero is dead, And by that order of proscription. (to BRUTUS) Had you your letters from your wife, my lord?","Cicero is dead, by their decree. (to BRUTUS) Have you received letters from your wife, my lord?"
"No, Messala.","No, Messala."
Nor nothing in your letters writ of her?,And you haven’t heard any news about her in your letters?
"Nothing, Messala.","Nothing, Messala."
That methinks is strange.,I think that’s strange.
Why ask you? Hear you aught of her in yours?,Why do you ask? Have you heard something of her in your letters?
"No, my lord.","No, my lord."
"Now, as you are a Roman, tell me true.","Now, as you’re a Roman, tell me the truth."
Then like a Roman bear the truth I tell.,"Then you must take the truth I have to tell like a Roman. It’s certain that she is dead, and she died in a strange way."
"Why, farewell, Portia. We must die, Messala. With meditating that she must die once, I have the patience to endure it now.","Well, good-bye, Portia. We all must die, Messala. Having already thought about the fact that she would have to die sometime, I can endure her death now."
Even so great men great losses should endure.,That’s the way great men ought to endure great losses.
But yet my nature could not bear it so.,"I’ve practiced Stoicism with as much devotion as you, but I still couldn’t bear this news like you do."
"Well, to our work alive. What do you think Of marching to Philippi presently?","Well, let’s move on to our work with the living. What do you think of marching to Philippi immediately?"
I do not think it good.,I don’t think it’s a good idea.
Your reason?,Why not?
"This it is: So shall he waste his means, weary his soldiers, Doing himself offense, whilst we, lying still, Are full of rest, defense, and nimbleness.","Here’s why: it’d be better for the enemy to come after us. That way, he’ll waste his provisions and tire out his soldiers, weakening his own capacities, while we, lying still, are rested, energetic, and nimble."
"Good reasons must of force give place to better. Do stand but in a forced affection, For they have grudged us contribution. The enemy, marching along by them, By them shall make a fuller number up, From which advantage shall we cut him off If at Philippi we do face him there, These people at our back.","Your reasons are good, but I have better reasons for doing the opposite. The people who live between here and Philippi are loyal to us only because we force them to be. We made them contribute to our efforts against their will. The enemy, marching past them, will add them to its numbers, then come at us refreshed, newly reinforced, and full of courage. Thus we must cut him off from this advantage. If we meet him at Philippi, these people will be at our backs."
"Hear me, good brother—","Listen to me, good brother."
"Under your pardon. You must note beside, Our legions are brim-full, our cause is ripe. The enemy increaseth every day. We, at the height, are ready to decline. There is a tide in the affairs of men, Omitted, all the voyage of their life Is bound in shallows and in miseries. On such a full sea are we now afloat, And we must take the current when it serves","Begging your pardon, I’ll continue what I was saying. You must also take into account that we’ve gotten as much from our friends as they can give. Our regiments are full to the brim; our cause is ready. The enemy gets larger each day. We, now at our largest, can only decrease. There’s a tidal movement in men’s affairs. Seizing the highest tide leads on to fortune. If high tide is let to pass, all the rest of the voyage of their lives will be marked by difficulty and misery. It’s on such a high tide that we’re now floating, and we must take the current when it is offered, or lose our campaign."
"Then, with your will, go on. We’ll along ourselves, and meet them at Philippi.","If that’s what you want, all right. We’ll go forward with you and meet them at Philippi."
"The deep of night is crept upon our talk, And nature must obey necessity, Which we will niggard with a little rest.","It’s now late at night, and actions must accommodate bodily needs, which we’ll satisfy with only a short rest. That’s all there is to say."
No more. Good night. Early tomorrow will we rise and hence.,There’s nothing else. Good night. We’ll rise and leave early tomorrow.
Lucius!,Lucius!
My gown.,My nightgown.
"Farewell, good Messala.— Good night, Titinius.—Noble, noble Cassius, Good night and good repose.","Farewell, good Messala. Good night, Titinius. Noble, noble Cassius, good night and sleep well."
"O my dear brother, Never come such division ’tween our souls. Let it not, Brutus.","Oh my dear brother! This was a bad start to the night. Let’s pray that we never come into conflict like that again. Let’s not, Brutus."
Everything is well.,Everything’s fine.
"Good night, my lord.","Good night, my lord."
"Good night, good brother.","Good night, good brother."
"Good night, Lord Brutus.","Good night, Lord Brutus."
"Farewell, everyone.","Farewell, everyone."
Give me the gown. Where is thy instrument?,Give me the gown. Where’s your lute?
Here in the tent.,Here in the tent.
"What, thou speak’st drowsily? Poor knave, I blame thee not. Thou art o'erwatched. Call Claudio and some other of my men.","What, are you sleepy? Poor boy, I don’t blame you; you’ve stayed awake too long. Call Claudio and some of my other men. I’ll have them sleep on cushions in my tent."
Varrus and Claudio!,Varrus and Claudio!
Calls my lord?,"Did you call, my lord?"
"I pray you, sirs, lie in my tent and sleep. It may be I shall raise you by and by On business to my brother Cassius.","Sirs, I ask you to sleep in my tent. I might wake you up in a while to send you on an errand to my brother Cassius."
"So please you, we will stand and watch your pleasure.","If you like, we’ll stand by and wait to do whatever you need."
"I will not have it so. Lie down, good sirs. It may be I shall otherwise bethink me. —Look, Lucius, here’s the book I sought for so. I put it in the pocket of my gown.","No, please, lie down, good sirs, because I might change my mind. Look, Lucius, here’s the book I was searching for. I put it in the pocket of my nightgown."
I was sure your lordship did not give it me.,I was sure that you hadn’t given it to me.
"Bear with me, good boy, I am much forgetful. Canst thou hold up thy heavy eyes awhile, And touch thy instrument a strain or two?","Bear with me, good boy. I’ve become very forgetful. Can you stay awake a bit longer and play a few tunes on your lute?"
"Ay, my lord, an ’t please you.","Yes, my lord, if you would like."
"It does, my boy.","I would, my boy. I ask too much of you, but you’re always willing."
"It is my duty, sir.","It’s my duty, sir."
I should not urge thy duty past thy might. I know young bloods look for a time of rest.,I shouldn’t make you do more than you’re able. I know that young men look forward to their rest.
"I have slept, my lord, already.","I’ve already slept, my lord."
"I will not hold thee long. If I do live, I will be good to thee.","That was good planning, and you’ll sleep some more. I won’t keep you very long. If I live through this, I’ll be good to you."
"This is a sleepy tune. O murderous slumber, Layst thou thy leaden mace upon my boy I will not do thee so much wrong to wake thee. If thou dost nod, thou break’st thy instrument. I’ll take it from thee. And, good boy, good night. —Let me see, let me see. Is not the leaf turned down","This is a sleepy tune. Oh, deadening sleep, have you taken over my boy who plays music for you? Gentle boy, good night. I won’t trouble you so much as to wake you. If you were to droop down, you’d break your instrument, and so I’ll take it from you. Good night, good boy. Let me see, let me see. Didn’t I turn down the page where I left off reading? Here it is, I think. This candle doesn’t give much light."
"How ill this taper burns!—Ha, who comes here? I think it is the weakness of mine eyes That shapes this monstrous apparition. It comes upon me.—Art thou any thing? That makest my blood cold and my hair to stare? Speak to me what thou art.","What! Who goes there? I think it’s my bad eyesight that’s making me see this horrible vision. It’s coming toward me. Are you real? Are you a god, an angel, or a devil, that you make my blood turn cold and my hair stand up? Tell me what you are."
"Thy evil spirit, Brutus.","I’m your evil spirit, Brutus."
Why comest thou?,Why do you come here?
To tell thee thou shalt see me at Philippi.,To tell you that you’ll see me at Philippi.
"Well, then I shall see thee again?",Then I’ll see you again?
"Ay, at Philippi.","Yes, at Philippi."
"Why, I will see thee at Philippi, then.","Alright, then I’ll see you at Philippi."
"Now I have taken heart thou vanishest. Ill spirit, I would hold more talk with thee. —Claudio!","Just as you go, I find the courage to talk to you. Evil spirit, I want to talk some more. Boy, Lucius! Varrus! Claudio! Sirs, awake! Claudio!"
"The strings, my lord, are false.","My lord, the strings are out of tune."
"He thinks he still is at his instrument. Lucius, awake.","He thinks he’s still playing his instrument. Lucius, wake up!"
My lord?,My lord?
"Didst thou dream, Lucius, that thou so criedst out?","Were you dreaming, Lucius? Is that why you cried out?"
"My lord, I do not know that I did cry.","My lord, I don’t think I cried out."
"Yes, that thou didst. Didst thou see any thing?","Yes, you did. Did you see anything?"
"Nothing, my lord.","Nothing, my lord."
"(to VARRUS) Fellow thou, awake!","Go back to sleep, Lucius. Claudio! (to VARRUS) You there, wake up!"
My lord?,My lord?
My lord?,My lord?
"Why did you so cry out, sirs, in your sleep?",Why did you cry out in your sleep?
"Did we, my lord?","Did we, my lord?"
Ay. Saw you anything?,Yes. Did you see anything?
"No, my lord, I saw nothing.","No, my lord, I didn’t see anything."
"Nor I, my lord.","Me neither, my lord."
"Go and commend me to my brother Cassius. Bid him set on his powers betimes before, And we will follow.","Go to my brother Cassius. Order him to advance his forces first thing, and we’ll follow."
"It shall be done, my lord.","Yes, my lord."
"Now, Antony, our hopes are answerèd. You said the enemy would not come down But keep the hills and upper regions. It proves not so. Their battles are at hand. Answering before we do demand of them.","Now, Antony, our prayers have been answered. You said the enemy wouldn’t come down but keep to the hills and upper regions. It seems not. Their forces are nearby. They intend to challenge us here at Philippi, responding to our challenge before we’ve even challenged him."
"Tut, I am in their bosoms, and I know Wherefore they do it. They could be content To visit other places, and come down To fasten in our thoughts that they have courage. But ’tis not so.","I know how they think, and I understand why they’re doing this. They really wish they were somewhere else, but they want to descend on us, looking fierce so we’ll think they’re brave. But they aren’t."
"Prepare you, generals. The enemy comes on in gallant show. Their bloody sign of battle is hung out,","Prepare yourselves, generals. The enemy approaches with great display. They show their bloody heralds of battle, and something must be done immediately."
"Octavius, lead your battle softly on, Upon the left hand of the even field.","Octavius, lead your forces slowly out to the left side of the level field."
Upon the right hand I. Keep thou the left.,I’ll go to the right side. You stay on the left.
Why do you cross me in this exigent?,Why are you defying me in this urgent matter?
I do not cross you. But I will do so.,"I’m not defying you, but it’s what I’m going to do."
They stand and would have parley.,They’ve stopped. They want to talk.
"Stand fast, Titinius. We must out and talk.","Stay here, Titinius. We have to go out and talk to them."
"Mark Antony, shall we give sign of battle?","Mark Antony, should we give the signal to attack?"
"No, Caesar, we will answer on their charge.","No, Octavius Caesar, we’ll respond to their charge. Go forward. The generals want to speak with us."
(to his army) Stir not until the signal.,(to his army) Don’t move until we give the signal.
"Words before blows. Is it so, countrymen?","Words before fighting. Is that how it is, countrymen?"
"Not that we love words better, as you do.","Not that we love words more than fighting, like you do."
"Good words are better than bad strokes, Octavius.","Good words are better than bad strokes, Octavius."
"Witness the hole you made in Caesar’s heart, Crying “Long live, hail, Caesar!”","Brutus, you give a nice speech along with your evil strokes. Think of the hole you made in Caesar’s heart when you cried, “Long live Caesar! Hail Caesar!”"
"Antony, The posture of your blows are yet unknown. But for your words, they rob the Hybla bees","Antony, we don’t yet know what kind of blows you can inflict. But your words are as sweet as honey—you’ve stolen from the bees and left them with nothing."
Not stingless too?,"I took their stings too, wouldn’t you say?"
"Oh, yes, and soundless too. For you have stol'n their buzzing, Antony, And very wisely threat before you sting.","Oh, yes, and you’ve left them silent too, because you stole their buzzing, Antony. You very wisely warn us before you sting."
"Hacked one another in the sides of Caesar. You showed your teeth like apes, and fawned like hounds, And bowed like bondmen, kissing Caesar’s feet, Whilst damnèd Casca, like a cur, behind","Villains, you didn’t do even that much when your vile daggers struck each other as they hacked up Caesar’s sides. You smiled like apes and fawned like dogs and bowed like servants, kissing Caesar’s feet. And all the while, damned Casca, like a dog, struck Caesar on the neck from behind. Oh, you flatterers!"
"Flatterers?—Now, Brutus, thank yourself. This tongue had not offended so today If Cassius might have ruled.","Flatterers! Now, Brutus, you have only yourself to thank. Antony wouldn’t be here to offend us today if you’d listened to me earlier."
"Come, come, the cause. If arguing make us sweat, (draws his sword) Look, I draw a sword against conspirators. When think you that the sword goes up again? Never, till Caesar’s three and thirty wounds Be well avenged, or till another Caesar","Come, come, let’s remember why we’re here. If arguing makes us sweat, the real trial will turn that water to blood. (he draws his sword) Look: I draw my sword against conspirators. When do you think I’ll put it away? Never, until Caesar’s thirty-three wounds are well avenged, or until I too have been killed by you."
"Caesar, thou canst not die by traitors' hands Unless thou bring’st them with thee.","Caesar, you’re not going to be killed by a traitor—unless you kill yourself.."
So I hope. I was not born to die on Brutus' sword.,I hope you’re right. I wasn’t born to die on your sword.
"O, if thou wert the noblest of thy strain,","If you were the noblest of your family, young man, you couldn’t die more honorably."
"A peevish schoolboy, worthless of such honor, Joined with a masker and a reveler!","An annoying schoolboy, unworthy of such an honor, joined by a masquerader and a partier!"
Old Cassius still.,Still the same old Cassius!
"Come, Antony, away.— Defiance, traitors, hurl we in your teeth. If not, when you have stomachs.","Come Antony, let’s go. Traitors, we defy you. If you dare to fight today, come to the field. If not, come when you have the courage."
"Why, now, blow wind, swell billow, and swim bark! The storm is up and all is on the hazard.","Now let the wind blow, waves swell, and ships sink! The storm has begun and everything is at stake."
"Ho, Lucillius, hark, a word with you.",Lucillius! I’d like a word with you.
My lord?,(coming forward) My lord?
Messala!,Messala!
(stands forth) What says my general?,"(coming forward) What is it, my general?"
"Messala, This is my birthday, as this very day Was Cassius born. Give me thy hand, Messala. As Pompey was, am I compelled to set Upon one battle all our liberties.","Messala, today is my birthday—I was born on this very day. Give me your hand, Messala. You’ll be my witness that I’ve been forced, as Pompey was, to wager all of our freedoms on one battle."
"You know that I held Epicurus strong And his opinion. Now I change my mind, Coming from Sardis, on our former ensign Two mighty eagles fell, and there they perched, Gorging and feeding from our soldiers' hands, Who to Philippi here consorted us. And in their steads do ravens, crows, and kites Fly o'er our heads and downward look on us As we were sickly prey. Their shadows seem A canopy most fatal, under which","You know that I used to believe in Epicurus and his disregard for omens. I’ve changed my mind now and partly believe in omens. Traveling from Sardis, two mighty eagles fell on our front flag and perched there, eating from the hands of the soldiers who’d accompanied us to Philippi. This morning, they’ve flown away and in their place are ravens, crows, and kites, flying over our heads and looking down on us, as though we were sickly prey. Their shadows are like a deadly canopy, under which our army lies, ready to die."
Believe not so.,Don’t believe in this.
"I but believe it partly, For I am fresh of spirit and resolved To meet all perils very constantly.","I only partly believe it, for I’m enthusiastic and resolved to meet all dangers without wavering."
"(returning with LUCILLIUS) Even so, Lucillius.","(returning with LUCILLIUS) —Right, Lucillius."
"Now, most noble Brutus, Lovers in peace, lead on our days to age. But since the affairs of men rest still incertain, Let’s reason with the worst that may befall. If we do lose this battle, then is this What are you then determinèd to do?","Now, most noble Brutus, the gods are friendly with us today so that we, who want peace, can live on to old age! But since the affairs of men are always uncertain, let’s think about the worst that may happen. If we lose this battle, this is the last time we’ll speak to each other. If we lose, what do you plan to do?"
"Even by the rule of that philosophy By which I did blame Cato for the death Which he did give himself (I know not how, For fear of what might fall, so to prevent The time of life), arming myself with patience To stay the providence of some high powers That govern us below.","By the same principle that made me condemn Cato for committing suicide, I plan to be patient and submit to what the gods decide. I don’t know why, but I find it cowardly and vile to kill oneself early to prevent possible suffering later on."
Then if we lose this battle Thorough the streets of Rome?,"Then if we lose this battle, you’ll be willing to be led in chains through the streets of Rome?"
"No, Cassius, no. Think not, thou noble Roman, That ever Brutus will go bound to Rome. He bears too great a mind. But this same day And whether we shall meet again I know not. Therefore our everlasting farewell take. Forever and forever farewell, Cassius. If we do meet again, why, we shall smile.","No, Cassius, no. Don’t imagine that I’ll ever allow myself to return to Rome in chains. My mind is too great for that. But today, the work that March th began must end, and I don’t know if we’ll meet again. Therefore, accept my everlasting farewell. Forever and forever, farewell, Cassius! If we meet again, then we’ll smile. If not, then this parting was well done."
"Forever and forever farewell, Brutus. If we do meet again, we’ll smile indeed. If not, ’tis true this parting was well made.","Forever and forever, farewell, Brutus! If we meet again, then we’ll smile indeed. If not, it’s true, this parting was well done."
"Why then, lead on. Oh, that a man might know But it sufficeth that the day will end, And then the end is known.—Come, ho! Away!","Well, lead on. Oh, I wish I could know what will happen today before it happens! But it’s enough to know that the day will end, and then the end will be known. Come! Let’s go!"
"Ride, ride, Messala, ride, and give these bills Unto the legions on the other side.","Ride, ride, Messala, ride, and give these dispatches to our forces on the other side."
"Let them set on at once, for I perceive But cold demeanor in Octavius' wing, Ride, ride, Messala. Let them all come down.","They should advance immediately, because I sense Octavius’s side is a bit fainthearted right now, and a sudden push would overthrow him. Ride, ride, Messala. Let Cassius’s wing mount a surprise attack."
"O, look, Titinius, look, the villains fly! Myself have to mine own turned enemy. This ensign here of mine was turning back. I slew the coward and did take it from him.","Oh, look, Titinius, look! Those villains, our soldiers, flee! I’ve become an enemy to my own soldiers! This standard-bearer here of mine was running away, so I killed him and took the flag from him. (points to his flag)"
"O Cassius, Brutus gave the word too early, Who, having some advantage on Octavius, Took it too eagerly. His soldiers fell to spoil, Whilst we by Antony are all enclosed.","Oh, Cassius, Brutus gave the orders too soon. Having an advantage over Octavius, he took it too eagerly, and his soldiers began looting, and now we’re surrounded by Antony’s men."
"Mark Antony is in your tents, my lord. Fly, therefore, noble Cassius, fly far off.","Retreat further, my lord, retreat further. Mark Antony is in your tents, my lord. Therefore you must run, noble Cassius."
"This hill is far enough.—Look, look, Titinius. Are those my tents where I perceive the fire?","This hill is far enough. Look, look, Titinius. Are those my tents on fire?"
"They are, my lord.","They are, my lord."
"Titinius, if thou lovest me, Mount thou my horse, and hide thy spurs in him Till he have brought thee up to yonder troops And here again, that I may rest assured Whether yond troops are friend or enemy.","Titinius, if you love me, get on your horse and spur him on until he’s brought you to those troops and back again, so that I can find out whether those troops are friends or enemies."
"I will be here again, even with a thought.",I’ll be back quicker than you can think a thought.
"Go, Pindarus, get higher on that hill. My sight was ever thick. Regard Titinius, And tell me what thou notest about the field.","Go, Pindarus, climb a little higher on this hill. My eyesight has always been bad. Watch Titinius and tell me what you see in the field."
"This day I breathed first. Time is come round, My life is run his compass. (to PINDARUS)    Sirrah, what news?","Today was the day I breathed my first breath. Time has come round, and I’ll end where I began. My life has run its circle. (to PINDARUS) What can you see, boy?"
(above) O my lord!,"(above) Oh, my lord!"
What news?,What news?
"With horsemen, that make to him on the spur. Yet he spurs on. Now they are almost on him. Now, Titinius. Now some light. Oh, he lights too. He’s ta'en.","(above) Titinius is surrounded by horsemen who are quickly approaching him, yet he spurs onward. Now they’re almost on him. Now, Titinius! Now some dismount. Oh, he gets down too. He’s taken."
"And, hark! They shout for joy.",And listen! They shout for joy.
"Come down, behold no more. Oh, coward that I am, to live so long To see my best friend ta'en before my face!","Come down, look no more. Oh, I’m such a coward for living long enough to see my best friend taken before my eyes!"
"Come hither, sirrah. In Parthia did I take thee prisoner. That whatsoever I did bid thee do, Thou shouldst attempt it. Come now, keep thine oath. (gives his sword to PINDARUS) Now be a free man, and with this good sword Stand not to answer. Here take thou the hilts And, when my face is covered, as ’tis now, Guide thou the sword.","Come here, boy. I took you prisoner in Parthia, and at that time I made you swear to try to do whatever I ordered you to, except take your own life. Come now, keep your oath. (gives his sword to PINDARUS) Now you’ll be a free man. Take this good sword, which ran through Caesar’s bowels, and plunge it in my chest. Don’t hesitate. Here, take the handle, and when my face is covered as it is now, use the sword."
"Caesar, thou art revenged, Even with the sword that killed thee.","Caesar, you are revenged with the very same sword that killed you. (he dies)"
"So I am free. Yet would not so have been, Durst I have done my will. O Cassius, Far from this country Pindarus shall run, Where never Roman shall take note of him.","So I’m free. But I didn’t want to be free like this. Oh, Cassius, I’ll run far from this country to where no Romans can find me."
"Is overthrown by noble Brutus' power, As Cassius' legions are by Antony.","The armies have merely changed places, Titinius, because Octavius has been overthrown by noble Brutus’s forces at the very moment that Antony overthrew Cassius’s legions."
These tidings will well comfort Cassius.,This news will comfort Cassius.
Where did you leave him?,Where did you leave him?
"All disconsolate,","On this hill and in despair, with his slave Pindarus."
Is not that he that lies upon the ground?,Isn’t that him on the ground?
He lies not like the living. O my heart!,"He doesn’t seem to be alive. Oh, my heart!"
Is not that he?,Isn’t that him?
"No, this was he, Messala, But Cassius is no more. O setting sun, So in his red blood Cassius' day is set. The sun of Rome is set. Our day is gone. Clouds, dews, and dangers come! Our deeds are done. Mistrust of my success hath done this deed.","No, it was him, Messala, but Cassius is no more. Just as the sun’s rays turn red when it sets, so Cassius has ended his life in a pool of red blood. The sun of Rome has set! Our day is over. Clouds, dew, and dangers approach. We’re finished! He didn’t believe I would ever return on my mission, and so he killed himself."
"O hateful error, melancholy’s child, Why dost thou show to the apt thoughts of men The things that are not? O error, soon conceived, Thou never comest unto a happy birth","Yes, he killed himself because he thought we’d lost the whole battle. Sadness, which misconstrues reality, gave birth to his errors in thinking—and then destroyed him."
"What, Pindarus! Where art thou, Pindarus?","Pindarus! Where are you, Pindarus?"
"Seek him, Titinius, whilst I go to meet The noble Brutus, thrusting this report Into his ears. I may say “thrusting” it, Shall be as welcome to the ears of Brutus As tidings of this sight.","Look for him, Titinius, while I go to meet the noble Brutus and force him to hear this news. I say “force” because Brutus would rather I stuck sharp blades and poisoned arrows in his ears than fill them with this."
"Hie you, Messala, And I will seek for Pindarus the while.","Hurry, Messala, and I’ll look for Pindarus in the meantime."
"Why didst thou send me forth, brave Cassius? Put on my brows this wreath of victory And bid me give it thee? Didst thou not hear their shouts? Alas, thou hast misconstrued everything! But, hold thee, take this garland on thy brow. Will do his bidding. (lays wreath on CASSIUS’s head) Brutus, come apace, And see how I regarded Caius Cassius. —By your leave, gods, this is a Roman’s part. (stabs himself with CASSIUS’s sword and dies)","Why did you send me out, brave Cassius? Didn’t I meet up with your allies? And didn’t they place the wreath of victory on my brow and order me to give it to you? Didn’t you hear their shouts? Alas, you misunderstood everything! But let me place this wreath on your head. Your Brutus ordered me to give it to you, and I’ll do what he says. (he lays a wreath on CASSIUS’s head) Brutus, come this way and see how much I admired Caius Cassius. With your permission, gods, this is a Roman’s duty. Come, Cassius’s sword, and strike Titinius’s heart. (he stabs himself with CASSIUS’s sword and dies.)"
"Where, where, Messala, doth his body lie?","Where is his body, Messala?"
"Lo, yonder, and Titinius mourning it.","Over there, where Titinius mourns it."
Titinius' face is upward.,Titinius is lying face-up.
He is slain.,He’s been killed.
Thy spirit walks abroad and turns our swords In our own proper entrails.,"Oh, Julius Caesar, you are still powerful. Your ghost walks the earth and turns our swords toward our own stomachs."
Brave Titinius!— Look whe 'er he have not crowned dead Cassius.,"Brave Titinius! Look, he even put the crown on dead Cassius!"
"Are yet two Romans living such as these? It is impossible that ever Rome Should breed thy fellow.—Friends, I owe more tears To this dead man than you shall see me pay. —I shall find time, Cassius, I shall find time. His funerals shall not be in our camp, Lest it discomfort us.—Lucillius, come.— And come, young Cato. Let us to the field. —Labio and Flavio, set our battles on. We shall try fortune in a second fight.","Could you have found two Romans as good as these two? Good-bye to you, the last of all the Romans. Rome will never produce your equal. Friends, I owe more tears to this dead man than you will see me shed. I will find the time to cry for you, Cassius, I’ll find the time. Come, then, and send his body to Thasos. We won’t have his funeral at our camp, because it might make us too sad to fight. Lucillius, come. And come, young Cato. Let’s proceed to the field. Labio and Flavio, push our armies onward. It is three o'clock, and, Romans, before night, we will try our luck in a second battle."
"Yet, countrymen, O, yet hold up your heads!","Keep on, countrymen. Oh, keep your heads up, even now!"
"What bastard doth not? Who will go with me? I will proclaim my name about the field. I am the son of Marcus Cato, ho! I am the son of Marcus Cato, ho!",Who is so low that he wouldn’t? Who will advance with me? I will proclaim my name around the field. I am the son of Marcus Cato! An enemy to tyrants and a friend to my country. I am the son of Marcus Cato!
"And I am Brutus, Marcus Brutus, I! Brutus, my country’s friend. Know me for Brutus!","And I am Brutus, Marcus Brutus. Brutus, my country’s friend. Know that I am Brutus!"
"O young and noble Cato, art thou down? And mayst be honored, being Cato’s son.","Oh, young and noble Cato, have you been slain? Why, you die now as bravely as Titinius. And you, being Cato’s son, will be honored."
"(to LUCILLIUS) Yield, or thou diest.",(to LUCILLIUS ) Surrender or you will die.
"Only I yield to die. There is so much that thou wilt kill me straight. Kill Brutus, and be honored in his death.",I’d rather die. Here is some money for you to kill me immediately. Kill Brutus and be honored by the killing.
We must not. A noble prisoner!,We must not. He is a noble prisoner!
"Room, ho! Tell Antony Brutus is ta'en.",Make room! Tell Antony that Brutus has been taken.
"I’ll tell the news. Here comes the general. —Brutus is ta'en, Brutus is ta'en, my lord.","I’ll tell him the news. Oh, here comes the general—Brutus has been caught, Brutus is taken, my lord."
Where is he?,Where is he?
"I dare assure thee that no enemy Shall ever take alive the noble Brutus. The gods defend him from so great a shame! When you do find him, or alive or dead,","He’s safe, Antony. I can assure you that no enemy will ever take the noble Brutus alive. The gods protect him from so great a shame! When you do find him, alive or dead, he’ll be found on his own terms."
"(to SOLDIERS) This is not Brutus, friend, but, I assure you, A prize no less in worth. Keep this man safe. Give him all kindness. I had rather have Such men my friends than enemies. Go on, And bring us word unto Octavius' tent How everything is chanced.","(to SOLDIERS) This isn’t Brutus, friend, but, I assure you, he is a valuable prize. Keep this man safe. Be kind to him. I would rather have such men as friends than enemies. Move on, find out if Brutus is alive or dead, then return to Octavius’s tent to tell us what you’ve learned."
"Come, poor remains of friends, rest on this rock.","Come, last of my friends, rest on this rock."
"Statilius showed the torchlight but, my lord, He came not back. He is or ta'en or slain.","Statilius waved the torchlight at us, but he hasn’t come back. He’s been captured or killed."
"Sit thee down, Clitus. Slaying is the word. (whispers to CLITUS)","Sit down, Clitus. Killed, most likely—it’s become a trend. Listen, Clitus. (he whispers to CLITUS)"
"What, I, my lord? No, not for all the world.","Who, me, my lord? No, not for all the world."
Peace then! No words.,"Silence, then! Don’t give it away."
I’ll rather kill myself.,I’d rather kill myself.
"Hark thee, Dardanius.","Listen, Dardanius. (he whispers to DARDANIUS)"
Shall I do such a deed?,Would I dare do something like that?
O Dardanius!,Oh Dardanius!
O Clitus!,Oh Clitus!
(aside to DARDANIUS) What ill request did Brutus make to thee?,(speaking so that only DARDANIUS can hear) What awful thing did Brutus ask of you?
"To kill him, Clitus. Look, he meditates.","(speaking so that only CLITUS can hear) To kill him, Clitus. Look, he’s meditating on what to do."
"(aside to DARDANIUS) Now is that noble vessel full of grief, That it runs over even at his eyes.",(speaking so that only DARDANIUS can hear) That noble man is so full of grief that it spills out of his eyes.
"Come hither, good Volumnius. List a word.","Come here, good Volumnius. Listen a minute."
What says my lord?,"What is it, my lord?"
"Why this, Volumnius: The ghost of Caesar hath appeared to me Two several times by night. At Sardis once, And this last night here in Philippi fields. I know my hour is come.","Just this, Volumnius. The ghost of Caesar has appeared to me at night twice. Once at Sardis and once last night, here in Philippi fields. I know that my hour has come."
"Not so, my lord.","No, it hasn’t, my lord."
"Thou seest the world, Volumnius, how it goes. Our enemies have beat us to the pit.","No, I’m sure it has, Volumnius. You see how the world goes, Volumnius. Our enemies have driven us to the edge of the grave."
"It is more worthy to leap in ourselves Than tarry till they push us. Good Volumnius, Even for that our love of old, I prithee, Hold thou my sword hilts, whilst I run on it.","It’s nobler to leap in ourselves than dawdle until they push us. Good Volumnius, you know that we went to school together. For the sake of our old friendship, I ask you, hold my sword handle while I run on it."
"That’s not an office for a friend, my lord.","That’s not a job for a friend, my lord."
"Fly, fly, my lord. There is no tarrying here.","Run, run, my lord. We can’t wait here."
"—Strato, thou hast been all this while asleep. Farewell to thee too, Strato.—Countrymen, My heart doth joy that yet in all my life I found no man but he was true to me. More than Octavius and Mark Antony By this vile conquest shall attain unto. So fare you well at once, for Brutus' tongue Hath almost ended his life’s history. That have but labored to attain this hour.","Farewell to you, and you, and you, Volumnius. Strato, you’ve slept this whole time. Farewell to you too, Strato. Countrymen, my heart rejoices that in all my life I knew no men who were untrue to me. I’ll have glory in this losing day—more than Octavius and Mark Antony will gain by their foul conquest. So farewell, all, for my tongue has almost finished with its life. I can’t see ahead of me. My bones want to rest after helping me up to this hour."
"Fly, my lord, fly.","Run, my lord, run."
Hence. I will follow.,Go on! I’ll follow.
"I prithee, Strato, stay thou by thy lord. Thou art a fellow of a good respect. Hold then my sword and turn away thy face While I do run upon it. Wilt thou, Strato?","I beg you, Strato, stay by me. You’re a man with a good reputation. Your life has had honor in it. Then, hold my sword and turn your face away while I run on it. Will you, Strato?"
"Give me your hand first. (holds BRUTUS' sword) Fare you well, my lord.","Give me your hand, first. (holds BRUTUS' sword) Farewell, my lord."
"(runs on his sword)    Caesar, now be still. I killed not thee with half so good a will. (dies)","Farewell, good Strato. (runs on his sword) Caesar, you can rest now. I didn’t kill you half as willingly. (he dies)"
What man is that?,What man is that?
"My master’s man.—Strato, where is thy master?","My master’s man. Strato, where’s your master?"
"The conquerors can but make a fire of him. For Brutus only overcame himself, And no man else hath honor by his death.","Free from the bondage you are in, Messala. The conquerors can only make a fire of him, because only Brutus triumphed over himself, and no other man gets to triumph in his death."
"So Brutus should be found.—I thank thee, Brutus,","It’s fitting that Brutus be found like this. Thank you, Brutus, for proving my prediction true."
"All that served Brutus, I will entertain them. —Fellow, wilt thou bestow thy time with me?","I’ll take all who served Brutus into my service. You, will you join with me?"
"Ay, if Messala will prefer me to you.","Yes, if Messala recommends me to you."
"Do so, good Messala.","Do so, good Messala."
"How died my master, Strato?","How did my master die, Strato?"
I held the sword and he did run on it.,I held the sword and he ran on it.
"Octavius, then take him to follow thee, That did the latest service to my master.","Then take this man into your service, Octavius, for he did the final service to my master."
"This was the noblest Roman of them all. All the conspirators save only he He only in a general honest thought And common good to all, made one of them. His life was gentle, and the elements So mixed in him that Nature might stand up","This was the noblest Roman of them all. All the rest of the conspirators acted out of jealousy of great Caesar. Only he acted from honesty and for the general good. His life was gentle, and the elements mixed so well in him that Nature might stand up and say to all the world, “This was a man.”"
"According to his virtue let us use him, With all respect and rites of burial. Within my tent his bones tonight shall lie Most like a soldier, ordered honorably. To part the glories of this happy day.","Let’s treat him according to his virtue, with all the respect and rituals of burial. His body will lie in my tent tonight, with the honorable observance that suits a soldier. So order the armies to rest, and let’s go home to share the glories of this happy day."
