"When shall we three meet again? In thunder, lightning, or in rain?","When should the three of us meet again? Will it be in thunder, lightning, or rain?"
"When the hurly-burly’s done, When the battle’s lost and won.","We’ll meet when the noise of the battle is over, when one side has won and the other side has lost."
That will be ere the set of sun.,That will happen before sunset.
Where the place?,Where should we meet?
Upon the heath.,Let’s do it in the open field.
There to meet with Macbeth.,We’ll meet Macbeth there.
"I come, Graymalkin!","(calling to her cat) I’m coming, Graymalkin!"
Paddock calls.,"My toad, Paddock, calls me."
Anon.,(to her spirit) I’ll be right here!
"Fair is foul, and foul is fair Hover through the fog and filthy air.","Fair is foul, and foul is fair. Let’s fly away through the fog and filthy air."
"What bloody man is that? He can report, As seemeth by his plight, of the revolt The newest state.","Who is this bloody man? Judging from his appearance, I bet he can tell us the latest news about the revolt."
This is the sergeant Who like a good and hardy soldier fought Say to the king the knowledge of the broil As thou didst leave it.,"This is the brave sergeant who fought to keep me from being captured. Hail, brave friend! Tell the king what was happening in the battle when you left it."
"Doubtful it stood, As two spent swimmers that do cling together And choke their art. The merciless Macdonwald— The multiplying villanies of nature Do swarm upon him—from the Western Isles Of kerns and gallowglasses is supplied, And fortune, on his damnèd quarrel smiling, For brave Macbeth—well he deserves that name— Disdaining fortune, with his brandished steel, Which smoked with bloody execution, Like valor’s minion carved out his passage Which ne'er shook hands, nor bade farewell to him, Till he unseamed him from the nave to th' chops, And fixed his head upon our battlements.","For a while you couldn’t tell who would win. The armies were like two exhausted swimmers clinging to each other and struggling in the water, unable to move. The villainous rebel Macdonwald was supported by foot soldiers and horsemen from Ireland and the Hebrides, and Lady Luck was with him, smiling cruelly at his enemies as if she were his whore. But Luck and Macdonwald together weren’t strong enough. Brave Macbeth, laughing at Luck, chopped his way through to Macdonwald, who didn’t even have time to say good-bye or shake hands before Macbeth split him open from his navel to his jawbone and stuck his head on our castle walls."
O valiant cousin! Worthy gentleman!,My brave relative! What a worthy man!
"Shipwracking storms and direful thunders break, So from that spring whence comfort seemed to come Discomfort swells. Mark, King of Scotland, mark: No sooner justice had, with valor armed, But the Norweyan lord, surveying vantage, With furbished arms and new supplies of men, Began a fresh assault.","But in the same way that violent storms always come just as spring appears, our success against Macdonwald created new problems for us. Listen to this, King: as soon as we sent those Irish soldiers running for cover, the Norwegian king saw his chance to attack us with fresh troops and shiny weapons."
"Dismayed not this our captains, Macbeth and Banquo?","Didn’t this frighten our captains, Macbeth and Banquo?"
"If I say sooth, I must report they were As cannons overcharged with double cracks, So they doubly redoubled strokes upon the foe. Except they meant to bathe in reeking wounds, I cannot tell— But I am faint, my gashes cry for help.","The new challenge scared them about as much as sparrows frighten eagles, or rabbits frighten a lion. To tell you the truth, they fought the new enemy with twice as much force as before; they were like cannons loaded with double ammunition. Maybe they wanted to take a bath in their enemies' blood, or make that battlefield as infamous as Golgotha, where Christ was crucified, I don’t know. But I feel weak. My wounds must be tended to."
So well thy words become thee as thy wounds; They smack of honor both. Go get him surgeons.,"Your words, like your wounds, bring you honor. Take him to the surgeons."
Who comes here?,Who is this?
The worthy thane of Ross.,The worthy Thane “Thane” is a Scottish title of nobility. Thane of Ross.
What a haste looks through his eyes! So should he look That seems to speak things strange.,His eyes seem frantic! He looks like someone with a strange tale to tell.
God save the king.,God save the king!
"Whence cam’st thou, worthy thane?","Where have you come from, worthy thane?"
"From Fife, great king, Where the Norweyan banners flout the sky Norway himself, with terrible numbers, Assisted by that most disloyal traitor, The thane of Cawdor, began a dismal conflict, Till that Bellona’s bridegroom, lapped in proof, Point against point, rebellious arm 'gainst arm, Curbing his lavish spirit; and to conclude, The victory fell on us.","Great king, I’ve come from Fife, where the Norwegian flag flies, mocking our country and frightening our people. Leading an enormous army and assisted by that disloyal traitor, the thane of Cawdor, the king of Norway began a bloody battle. But outfitted in his battle-weathered armor, Macbeth met the Norwegian attacks shot for shot, as if he were the goddess of war’s husband. Finally he broke the enemy’s spirit, and we were victorious."
Great happiness!,Great happiness!
"That now Sweno, the Norways' king, craves composition. Till he disbursed at Saint Colme’s Inch Ten thousand dollars to our general use.","So now Sweno, the Norwegian king, wants a treaty. We told him we wouldn’t even let him bury his men until he retreated to Saint Colme’s Inch and paid us ten thousand dollars."
"No more that thane of Cawdor shall deceive Our bosom interest: go pronounce his present death,","The thane of Cawdor will never again betray me. Go announce that he will be executed, and tell Macbeth that Cawdor’s titles will be given to him."
I’ll see it done.,I’ll get it done right away.
"What he hath lost, noble Macbeth hath won.",The thane of Cawdor has lost what the noble Macbeth has won.
"Where hast thou been, sister?","Where have you been, sister?"
Killing swine.,Killing pigs.
"Sister, where thou?","And you, sister?"
"A sailor’s wife had chestnuts in her lap, quoth I. “Aroint thee, witch!” the rump-fed runnion cries. Her husband’s to Aleppo gone, master o' th' Tiger; But in a sieve I’ll thither sail, And like a rat without a tail,","A sailor’s wife had chestnuts in her lap and munched away at them. “Give me one,” I said. “Get away from me, witch!” the fat woman cried. Her husband has sailed off to Aleppo as master of a ship called the Tiger. I’ll sail there in a kitchen strainer, turn myself into a tailless rat, and do things to him—"
I’ll give thee a wind.,I’ll give you some wind to sail there.
Thou 'rt kind.,How nice of you!
And I another.,And I will give you some more.
"I myself have all the other, All the quarters that they know I' th' shipman’s card. I’ll drain him dry as hay. Sleep shall neither night nor day He shall live a man forbid. Weary sev'nnights nine times nine Shall he dwindle, peak and pine.","I already have control of all the other winds, along with the ports from which they blow and every direction on the sailor’s compass in which they can go. I’ll drain the life out of him. He won’t catch a wink of sleep, either at night or during the day. He will live as a cursed man. For eighty-one weeks he will waste away in agony."
"Though his bark cannot be lost, Look what I have.","Although I can’t make his ship disappear, I can still make his journey miserable. Look what I have here."
"Show me, show me.","Show me, show me."
"Here I have a pilot’s thumb, Wrecked as homeward he did come.",Here I have the thumb of a pilot who was drowned while trying to return home.
Macbeth doth come.,"A drum, a drum! Macbeth has come."
"(dancing together in a circle) The weird sisters, hand in hand, Posters of the sea and land, Thus do go about, about, And thrice again, to make up nine. Peace! The charm’s wound up.","(dancing together in a circle) We weird sisters, hand in hand, swift travelers over the sea and land, dance around and around like so. Three times to yours, and three times to mine, and three times again, to add up to nine. Enough! The charm is ready."
So foul and fair a day I have not seen.,(to BANQUO) I have never seen a day that was so good and bad at the same time.
"How far is ’t called to Forres?—What are these That look not like th' inhabitants o' th' Earth, And yet are on ’t?—Live you? Or are you aught That man may question? You seem to understand me, By each at once her choppy finger laying And yet your beards forbid me to interpret That you are so.","How far is it supposed to be to Forres? (he sees the WITCHES) What are these creatures? They’re so withered-looking and crazily dressed. They don’t look like they belong on this planet, but I see them standing here on Earth. (to the WITCHES) Are you alive? Can you answer questions? You seem to understand me, because each of you has put a gruesome finger to her skinny lips. You look like women, but your beards keep me from believing that you really are."
"Speak, if you can: what are you?","Speak, if you can. What kind of creatures are you?"
"All hail, Macbeth! Hail to thee, thane of Glamis!","All hail, Macbeth! Hail to you, thane of Glamis!"
"All hail, Macbeth! Hail to thee, thane of Cawdor!","All hail, Macbeth! Hail to you, thane of Cawdor!"
"All hail, Macbeth, that shalt be king hereafter!","All hail, Macbeth, the future king!"
"Good sir, why do you start and seem to fear Things that do sound so fair? (to the WITCHES) I' th' name of truth, Are ye fantastical, or that indeed You greet with present grace and great prediction Of noble having and of royal hope, That he seems rapt withal. To me you speak not. If you can look into the seeds of time Speak, then, to me, who neither beg nor fear Your favors nor your hate.","My dear Macbeth, why do you look so startled and afraid of these nice things they’re saying? (to the WITCHES) Tell me honestly, are you illusions, or are you really what you seem to be? You’ve greeted my noble friend with honors and talk of a future so glorious that you’ve made him speechless. But you don’t say anything to me. If you can see the future and say how things will turn out, tell me. I don’t want your favors and I’m not afraid of your hatred."
Hail!,Hail!
Hail!,Hail!
Hail!,Hail!
Lesser than Macbeth and greater.,You are lesser than Macbeth but also greater.
"Not so happy, yet much happier.","You are not as happy as Macbeth, yet much happier."
"Thou shalt get kings, though thou be none. So all hail, Macbeth and Banquo!","Your descendants will be kings, even though you will not be one. So all hail, Macbeth and Banquo!"
"Banquo and Macbeth, all hail!","Banquo and Macbeth, all hail!"
"Stay, you imperfect speakers, tell me more. By Sinel’s death I know I am thane of Glamis. But how of Cawdor? The thane of Cawdor lives, A prosperous gentleman, and to be king No more than to be Cawdor. Say from whence You owe this strange intelligence, or why Upon this blasted heath you stop our way With such prophetic greeting. Speak, I charge you.","Wait! You only told me part of what I want to know. Stay and tell me more. I already know I am the thane of Glamis because I inherited the position when my father, Sinel, died. But how can you call me the thane of Cawdor? The thane of Cawdor is alive, and he’s a rich and powerful man. And for me to be the king is completely impossible, just as it’s impossible for me to be thane of Cawdor. Tell me where you learned these strange things, and why you stop us at this desolate place with this prophetic greeting? Speak, I command you."
And these are of them. Whither are they vanished?,"The earth has bubbles, just like the water, and these creatures must have come from a bubble in the earth. Where did they disappear to?"
"Into the air, and what seemed corporal Melted, as breath into the wind. Would they had stayed.",Into thin air. Their bodies melted like breath in the wind. I wish they had stayed!
Were such things here as we do speak about? That takes the reason prisoner?,Were these things we’re talking about really here? Or are we both on drugs?
Your children shall be kings.,Your children will be kings.
You shall be king.,You will be the king.
And thane of Cawdor too: went it not so?,And thane of Cawdor too. Isn’t that what they said?
To the selfsame tune and words. Who’s here?,That’s exactly what they said. Who’s this?
"The news of thy success, and when he reads Thy personal venture in the rebels' fight, His wonders and his praises do contend Which should be thine or his. Silenced with that, He finds thee in the stout Norweyan ranks, Nothing afeard of what thyself didst make, Strange images of death. As thick as tale Can post with post, and every one did bear And poured them down before him.","The king was happy to hear of your success, Macbeth. Whenever he hears the story of your exploits in the fight against the rebels, he becomes so amazed it makes him speechless. He was also shocked to learn that on the same day you fought the rebels you also fought against the army of Norway, and that you weren’t the least bit afraid of death, even as you killed everyone around you. Messenger after messenger delivered news of your bravery to the king with praise for how you defended his country."
"We are sent To give thee from our royal master thanks, Only to herald thee into his sight, Not pay thee.",The king sent us to give you his thanks and to bring you to him. Your real reward won’t come from us.
"He bade me, from him, call thee thane of Cawdor: In which addition, hail, most worthy thane, For it is thine.","And to give you a taste of what’s in store for you, he told me to call you the thane of Cawdor. So hail, thane of Cawdor! That title belongs to you now."
"What, can the devil speak true?",(shocked) Can the devil tell the truth?
The thane of Cawdor lives. Why do you dress me,The thane of Cawdor is still alive. Why are you giving me his title?
"Who was the thane lives yet, But under heavy judgment bears that life Which he deserves to lose. Whether he was combined With those of Norway, or did line the rebel With hidden help and vantage, or that with both But treasons capital, confessed and proved, Have overthrown him.","The man who was the thane of Cawdor is still alive, but he’s been sentenced to death, and he deserves to die. I don’t know whether he fought on Norway’s side, or if he secretly aided the rebels, or if he fought with both of our enemies. But his treason, which has been proven, and to which he’s confessed, means he’s finished."
"(aside)      Glamis, and thane of Cawdor! The greatest is behind. (to ROSS and ANGUS) Thanks for your pains. When those that gave the thane of Cawdor to me Promised no less to them?","(to himself) It’s just like they said—now I’m the thane of Glamis and the thane of Cawdor. And the best part of what they predicted is still to come. (to ROSS and ANGUS) Thank you for the news. (speaking so that only BANQUO can hear) Aren’t you beginning to hope your children will be kings? After all, the witches who said I was thane of Cawdor promised them nothing less."
"That, trusted home, Might yet enkindle you unto the crown, Besides the thane of Cawdor. But ’tis strange. The instruments of darkness tell us truths, Win us with honest trifles, to betray ’s In deepest consequence. (to ROSS and ANGUS) Cousins, a word, I pray you.","If you trust what they say, you might be on your way to becoming king, as well as thane of Cawdor. But this whole thing is strange. The agents of evil often tell us part of the truth in order to lead us to our destruction. They earn our trust by telling us the truth about little things, but then they betray us when it will damage us the most. (to ROSS and ANGUS) Gentlemen, I’d like to have a word with you, please."
"As happy prologues to the swelling act Of the imperial theme. (to ROSS and ANGUS) I thank you, gentlemen. (aside) This supernatural soliciting Cannot be ill, cannot be good. If ill, Commencing in a truth? I am thane of Cawdor. If good, why do I yield to that suggestion Whose horrid image doth unfix my hair And make my seated heart knock at my ribs, Are less than horrible imaginings.","(to himself) So far the witches have told me two things that came true, so it seems like this will culminate in my becoming king. (to ROSS and ANGUS) Thank you, gentlemen. (to himself) This supernatural temptation doesn’t seem like it can be a bad thing, but it can’t be good either. If it’s a bad thing, why was I promised a promotion that turned out to be true? Now I’m the thane of Cawdor, just like they said I would be. But if this is a good thing, why do I find myself thinking about murdering King Duncan, a thought so horrifying that it makes my hair stand on end and my heart pound inside my chest? The dangers that actually threaten me here and now frighten me less than the horrible things I’m imagining."
"My thought, whose murder yet is but fantastical, Shakes so my single state of man That function is smothered in surmise,","Even though it’s just a fantasy so far, the mere thought of committing murder shakes me up so much that I hardly know who I am anymore. My ability to act is stifled by my thoughts and speculations, and the only things that matter to me are things that don’t really exist."
Look how our partner’s rapt.,Look at Macbeth—he’s in a daze.
"(aside) If chance will have me king, why, chance may crown me Without my stir.","(to himself) If fate wants me to be king, perhaps fate will just make it happen and I won’t have to do anything."
"New honors come upon him, But with the aid of use.",(to ROSS and ANGUS) Macbeth is not used to his new titles. They’re like new clothes: they don’t fit until you break them in over time.
"(aside)      Come what come may, Time and the hour runs through the roughest day.","(to himself) One way or another, what’s going to happen is going to happen."
"Worthy Macbeth, we stay upon your leisure.","Good Macbeth, we’re ready when you are."
"With things forgotten. Kind gentlemen, your pains Are registered where every day I turn The leaf to read them. Let us toward the king. (aside to BANQUO) Think upon what hath chanced, and, at more time, Our free hearts each to other.","I beg your pardon; I was distracted. Kind gentlemen, I won’t forget the trouble you’ve taken for me whenever I think of this day. Let’s go to the king. (speaking so that only BANQUO can hear) Think about what happened today, and when we’ve both had time to consider things, let’s talk."
Very gladly.,Absolutely.
"Till then, enough. (to ROSS and ANGUS) Come, friends.","Until then, we’ve said enough. (to ROSS and ANGUS) Let’s go, my friends."
Is execution done on Cawdor? Are not Those in commission yet returned?,Has the former thane of Cawdor been executed yet? Haven’t the people in charge of that come back?
"My liege, They are not yet come back. But I have spoke With one that saw him die, who did report Implored your highness' pardon, and set forth A deep repentance. Nothing in his life Became him like the leaving it. He died As one that had been studied in his death As ’twere a careless trifle.","My king, they haven’t come back yet. But I spoke with someone who saw Cawdor die, and he said that Cawdor openly confessed his treasons, begged your highness’s forgiveness, and repented deeply. He never did anything in his whole life that looked as good as the way he died. He died like someone who had practiced how to toss away his most cherished possession as if it were a worthless a piece of garbage."
There’s no art To find the mind’s construction in the face. He was a gentleman on whom I built An absolute trust.,There’s no way to read a man’s mind by looking at his face. I trusted Cawdor completely.
"The sin of my ingratitude even now Was heavy on me. Thou art so far before That swiftest wing of recompense is slow To overtake thee. Would thou hadst less deserved, Might have been mine! Only I have left to say, More is thy due than more than all can pay.","(to MACBETH) My worthiest kinsman! Just this moment I was feeling guilty for not having thanked you enough. You have done so much for me so fast that it has been impossible to reward you properly. If you deserved less, then perhaps my payment would have matched your deeds! All I can say is that I owe you more than I can ever repay."
"The service and the loyalty I owe In doing it pays itself. Your highness' part Are to your throne and state children and servants, Which do but what they should, by doing everything Safe toward your love and honor.","The opportunity to serve you is its own reward. Your only duty, your highness, is to accept what we owe you. Our duty to you and your state is like the duty of children to their father or servants to their master. By doing everything we can to protect you, we’re only doing what we should."
"Welcome hither. I have begun to plant thee, and will labor That hast no less deserved, nor must be known No less to have done so, let me infold thee And hold thee to my heart.","You are welcome here. By making you thane of Cawdor, I have planted the seeds of a great career for you, and I will make sure they grow. (to BANQUO) Noble Banquo, you deserve no less than Macbeth, and everyone should know it. Let me bring you close to me and give you the benefit of my love and good will."
"There, if I grow, The harvest is your own.","Then if I accomplish anything great, it will be a credit to you."
"My plenteous joys, In drops of sorrow. Sons, kinsmen, thanes, And you whose places are the nearest, know We will establish our estate upon Our eldest, Malcolm, whom we name hereafter Not unaccompanied invest him only, But signs of nobleness, like stars, shall shine On all deservers. (to MACBETH) From hence to Inverness, And bind us further to you.","My joy is so overwhelming it brings tears to my eyes. My sons, relatives, lords, and all those closest to me, I want you to witness that I will bestow my kingdom on my eldest son, Malcolm. Today I name him the prince of Cumberland. But Malcolm isn’t going to be alone in receiving honors—titles of nobility will shine like stars on all of you who deserve them. (to MACBETH) And now, let’s go to your castle at Inverness, where I will become even more obliged to you because of your hospitality."
I’ll be myself the harbinger and make joyful The hearing of my wife with your approach. So humbly take my leave.,"I’m not happy unless I can be working for you. I will go ahead and bring my wife the good news that you are coming. With that, I’ll be off."
My worthy Cawdor!,My worthy Cawdor!
"On which I must fall down, or else o'erleap, For in my way it lies. Stars, hide your fires; Let not light see my black and deep desires. The eye wink at the hand, yet let that be","(to himself) Malcolm is now the prince of Cumberland! To become king myself, I’m either going to have to step over him or give up, because he’s in my way. Stars, hide your light so no one can see the terrible desires within me. I won’t let my eye look at what my hand is doing, but in the end I’m still going to do that thing I’d be horrified to see."
"True, worthy Banquo. He is full so valiant, And in his commendations I am fed; It is a banquet to me.—Let’s after him, Whose care is gone before to bid us welcome:","(to BANQUO, in the middle of a conversation we haven’t heard) You’re right, Banquo. Macbeth is every bit as valiant as you say, and I am satisfied with these praises of him. Let’s follow after him, now that he has gone ahead to prepare our welcome. He is a man without equal."
"(reading) “They met me in the day of success, and I have learned by the perfectest report they have more in them than mortal knowledge. When I burned in desire to question them further, they made themselves air, into which they vanished. Whiles I stood rapt in the wonder of it came missives from the king, who all-hailed me 'Thane of Cawdor,' by which title, before, these weird sisters saluted me, and referred me to the coming on of time with 'Hail, king that shalt be!' This have I thought good to deliver thee, my dearest partner of greatness, that thou might’st not lose the dues of rejoicing, by being ignorant of what greatness is promised thee. Lay it to thy heart, and farewell.”","“The witches met me on the day of my victory in battle, and I have since learned that they have supernatural knowledge. When I tried desperately to question them further, they vanished into thin air. While I stood spellbound, messengers from the king arrived and greeted me as the thane of Cawdor, which is precisely how the weird sisters had saluted me before calling me ’the future king!' I thought I should tell you this news, my dearest partner in greatness, so that you could rejoice along with me about the greatness that is promised to us. Keep it secret, and farewell.”"
"Glamis thou art, and Cawdor; and shalt be What thou art promised. Yet do I fear thy nature; It is too full o' th' milk of human kindness Art not without ambition, but without The illness should attend it. What thou wouldst highly, That wouldst thou holily; wouldst not play false, And yet wouldst wrongly win. Thou'ld’st have, great Glamis, And that which rather thou dost fear to do, Than wishest should be undone. Hie thee hither, That I may pour my spirits in thine ear And chastise with the valor of my tongue Which fate and metaphysical aid doth seem To have thee crowned withal.","(she looks up from the letter) You are thane of Glamis and Cawdor, and you’re going to be king, just like you were promised. But I worry about whether or not you have what it takes to seize the crown. You are too full of the milk of human kindness to strike aggressively at your first opportunity. You want to be powerful, and you don’t lack ambition, but you don’t have the mean streak that these things call for. The things you want to do, you want to do like a good man. You don’t want to cheat, yet you want what doesn’t belong to you. There’s something you want, but you’re afraid to do what you need to do to get it. You want it to be done for you. Hurry home so I can persuade you and talk you out of whatever’s keeping you from going after the crown. After all, fate and witchcraft both seem to want you to be king."
What is your tidings?,What news do you bring?
The king comes here tonight.,The king is coming here tonight.
Thou 'rt mad to say it. Would have informed for preparation?,"You must be crazy to say that! Isn’t Macbeth with the king, and wouldn’t Macbeth have told me in advance so I could prepare, if the king were really coming?"
"So please you, it is true: our thane is coming. One of my fellows had the speed of him, Who, almost dead for breath, had scarcely more","I’m sorry, but it’s the truth. Macbeth is coming. He sent a messenger ahead of him who arrived here so out of breath that he could barely speak his message."
Give him tending. He brings great news.,Take good care of him. He brings great news.
"The raven himself is hoarse That croaks the fatal entrance of Duncan That tend on mortal thoughts, unsex me here, And fill me from the crown to the toe top-full Of direst cruelty. Make thick my blood. Stop up the access and passage to remorse, Shake my fell purpose, nor keep peace between The effect and it! Come to my woman’s breasts, And take my milk for gall, you murd'ring ministers, Wherever in your sightless substances And pall thee in the dunnest smoke of hell, That my keen knife see not the wound it makes, Nor heaven peep through the blanket of the dark To cry “Hold, hold!”","So the messenger is short of breath, like a hoarse raven, as he announces Duncan’s entrance into my fortress, where he will die. Come, you spirits that asist murderous thoughts, make me less like a woman and more like a man, and fill me from head to toe with deadly cruelty! Thicken my blood and clog up my veins so I won’t feel remorse, so that no human compassion can stop my evil plan or prevent me from accomplishing it! Come to my female breast and turn my mother’s milk into poisonous acid, you murdering demons, wherever you hide, invisible and waiting to do evil! Come, thick night, and cover the world in the darkest smoke of hell, so that my sharp knife can’t see the wound it cuts open, and so heaven can’t peep through the darkness and cry, “No! Stop!”"
"Greater than both, by the all-hail hereafter, Thy letters have transported me beyond This ignorant present, and I feel now The future in the instant.","Great thane of Glamis! Worthy thane of Cawdor! You’ll soon be greater than both those titles, once you become king! Your letter has transported me from the present moment, when who knows what will happen, and has made me feel like the future is already here."
"My dearest love,","My dearest love, Duncan is coming here tonight."
And when goes hence?,And when is he leaving?
"Tomorrow, as he purposes.",He plans to leave tomorrow.
"O, never Shall sun that morrow see! Your face, my thane, is as a book where men May read strange matters. To beguile the time, Your hand, your tongue. Look like th' innocent flower, But be the serpent under ’t. He that’s coming Must be provided for; and you shall put This night’s great business into my dispatch, Give solely sovereign sway and masterdom.","That day will never come. Your face betrays strange feelings, my lord, and people will be able to read it like a book. In order to deceive them, you must appear the way they expect you to look. Greet the king with a welcoming expression in your eyes, your hands, and your words. You should look like an innocent flower, but be like the snake that hides underneath the flower. The king is coming, and he’s got to be taken care of. Let me handle tonight’s preparations, because tonight will change every night and day for the rest of our lives."
We will speak further.,We will speak about this further.
Only look up clear. To alter favor ever is to fear.,"You should project a peaceful mood, because if you look troubled, you will arouse suspicion. Leave all the rest to me."
This castle hath a pleasant seat. The air Nimbly and sweetly recommends itself Unto our gentle senses.,This castle is in a pleasant place. The air is sweet and appeals to my refined senses.
"This guest of summer, The temple-haunting martlet, does approve, Smells wooingly here. No jutty, frieze, Buttress, nor coign of vantage, but this bird Hath made his pendant bed and procreant cradle. Where they most breed and haunt, I have observed,","The fact that this summer bird, the house martin, builds his nests here proves how inviting the breezes are. There isn’t a single protrusion in the castle walls where these birds haven’t built their hanging nests to sleep and breed. I’ve noticed that they always like to settle and mate where the air is the nicest."
"See, see, our honored hostess! The love that follows us sometime is our trouble, Which still we thank as love. Herein I teach you How you shall bid God 'ild us for your pains, And thank us for your trouble.","Look, here comes our honored hostess! Sometimes the love my subjects bring me is inconvenient, but I still accept it as love. In doing so, I’m teaching you to thank me for the incovenience I’m causing you by being here, because it comes from my love to you."
"All our service, Were poor and single business to contend Against those honors deep and broad wherewith Your majesty loads our house. For those of old, And the late dignities heaped up to them,","Everything we’re doing for you, even if it were doubled and then doubled again, is nothing compared to the honors you have brought to our family. We gladly welcome you as our guests, with gratitude for both the honors you’ve given us before and the new honors you’ve just given us."
"Where’s the thane of Cawdor? We coursed him at the heels and had a purpose To be his purveyor; but he rides well, And his great love, sharp as his spur, hath holp him To his home before us. Fair and noble hostess,","Where is Macbeth, the thane of Cawdor? We followed closely after him. I hoped to arrive here before him, but he rides swiftly. And his great love, which is as sharp as his spur, helped him beat us here. Fair and noble hostess, we are your guests tonight."
"Your servants ever Have theirs, themselves, and what is theirs in compt, To make their audit at your highness' pleasure, Still to return your own.","We are your servants, your highness, and as always our house and everything in it is at your disposal, for after all, we keep it in your trust and we’re glad to give you back what’s yours."
"Give me your hand. Conduct me to mine host. We love him highly By your leave, hostess.","Give me your hand. Bring me to my host, Macbeth. I love him dearly, and I shall continue to favor him. Whenever you’re ready, hostess."
"If it were done when ’tis done, then ’twere well It were done quickly. If the assassination Could trammel up the consequence, and catch With his surcease success; that but this blow But here, upon this bank and shoal of time, We’d jump the life to come. But in these cases We still have judgment here, that we but teach Bloody instructions, which, being taught, return Commends the ingredients of our poisoned chalice To our own lips. He’s here in double trust: First, as I am his kinsman and his subject, Strong both against the deed; then, as his host, Not bear the knife myself. Besides, this Duncan Hath borne his faculties so meek, hath been So clear in his great office, that his virtues Will plead like angels, trumpet-tongued, against And pity, like a naked newborn babe, Striding the blast, or heaven’s cherubim, horsed Upon the sightless couriers of the air, Shall blow the horrid deed in every eye, To prick the sides of my intent, but only Vaulting ambition, which o'erleaps itself And falls on th' other.","If this business would really be finished when I did the deed, then it would be best to get it over with quickly. If the assassination of the king could work like a net, sweeping up everything and preventing any consequences, then the murder would be the be-all and end-all of the whole affair, and I would gladly put my soul and the afterlife at risk to do it. But for crimes like these there are still punishments in this world. By committing violent crimes we only teach other people to commit violence, and the violence of our students will come back to plague us teachers. Justice, being equal to everyone, forces us to drink from the poisoned cup that we serve to others. The king trusts me in two ways. First of all, I am his kinsman and his subject, so I should always try to protect him. Second, I am his host, so I should be closing the door in his murderer’s face, not trying to murder him myself. Besides, Duncan has been such a humble leader, so free of corruption, that his virtuous legacy will speak for him when he dies, as if angels were playing trumpets against the injustice of his murder. Pity, like an innocent newborn baby, will ride the wind with winged angels on invisible horses through the air to spread news of the horrible deed to everyone everywhere. People will shed a flood of tears that will drown the wind like a horrible downpour of rain. I can’t spur myself to action. The only thing motivating me is ambition, which makes people rush ahead of themselves toward disaster."
How now! What news?,What news do you have?
He has almost supped. Why have you left the chamber?,He has almost finished dinner. Why did you leave the dining room?
Hath he asked for me?,Has he asked for me?
Know you not he has?,Don’t you know he has?
"We will proceed no further in this business. He hath honored me of late, and I have bought Golden opinions from all sorts of people, Which would be worn now in their newest gloss,","We can’t go on with this plan. The king has just honored me, and I have earned the good opinion of all sorts of people. I want to enjoy these honors while the feeling is fresh and not throw them away so soon."
"Was the hope drunk Wherein you dressed yourself? Hath it slept since? And wakes it now, to look so green and pale At what it did so freely? From this time Such I account thy love. Art thou afeard As thou art in desire? Wouldst thou have that Which thou esteem’st the ornament of life, And live a coward in thine own esteem, Letting “I dare not” wait upon “I would, ”","Were you drunk when you seemed so hopeful before? Have you gone to sleep and woken up green and pale in fear of this idea? From now on this is what I’ll think of your love. Are you afraid to act the way you desire? Will you take the crown you want so badly, or will you live as a coward, always saying “I can’t” after you say “I want to”? You’re like the poor cat in the old story."
"Prithee, peace: I dare do all that may become a man; Who dares do more is none.","Please, stop! I dare to do only what is proper for a man to do. He who dares to do more is not a man at all."
"What beast was ’t, then, That made you break this enterprise to me? When you durst do it, then you were a man; Be so much more the man. Nor time nor place Did then adhere, and yet you would make both. They have made themselves, and that their fitness now Does unmake you. I have given suck, and know I would, while it was smiling in my face, Have plucked my nipple from his boneless gums And dashed the brains out, had I so sworn as you Have done to this.","If you weren’t a man, then what kind of animal were you when you first told me you wanted to do this? When you dared to do it, that’s when you were a man. And if you go one step further by doing what you dared to do before, you’ll be that much more the man. The time and place weren’t right before, but you would have gone ahead with the murder anyhow. Now the time and place are just right, but they’re almost too good for you. I have suckled a baby, and I know how sweet it is to love the baby at my breast. But even as the baby was smiling up at me, I would have plucked my nipple out of its mouth and smashed its brains out against a wall if I had sworn to do that the same way you have sworn to do this."
If we should fail?,But if we fail—
"We fail? And we’ll not fail. When Duncan is asleep— Whereto the rather shall his day’s hard journey Soundly invite him—his two chamberlains Will I with wine and wassail so convince Shall be a fume, and the receipt of reason A limbeck only: when in swinish sleep Their drenchèd natures lie as in a death, What cannot you and I perform upon His spongy officers, who shall bear the guilt Of our great quell?","We, fail? If you get your courage up, we can’t fail. When Duncan is asleep—the day’s hard journey has definitely made him tired—I’ll get his two servants so drunk that their memory will go up in smoke through the chimneys of their brains. When they lie asleep like pigs, so drunk they’ll be dead to the world, what won’t you and I be able to do to the unguarded Duncan? And whatever we do, we can lay all the blame on the drunken servants."
"Bring forth men-children only, For thy undaunted mettle should compose Nothing but males. Will it not be received, Of his own chamber and used their very daggers, That they have done ’t?","May you only give birth to male children, because your fearless spirit should create nothing that isn’t masculine. Once we have covered the two servants with blood, and used their daggers to kill, won’t people believe that they were the culprits?"
"Who dares receive it other, As we shall make our griefs and clamor roar Upon his death?",Who could think it happened any other way? We’ll be grieving loudly when we hear that Duncan has died.
"I am settled, and bend up Away, and mock the time with fairest show. False face must hide what the false heart doth know.","Now I’m decided, and I will exert every muscle in my body to commit this crime. Go now, and pretend to be a friendly hostess. Hide with a false pleasant face what you know in your false, evil heart."
"How goes the night, boy?","How’s the night going, boy?"
The moon is down. I have not heard the clock.,The moon has set. The clock hasn’t struck yet.
And she goes down at twelve.,"The moon sets at twelve, right?"
"I take ’t ’tis later, sir.","I think it’s later than that, sir."
"Hold, take my sword. There’s husbandry in heaven; A heavy summons lies like lead upon me, And yet I would not sleep. Merciful powers, Restrain in me the cursèd thoughts that nature Gives way to in repose.","Here, take my sword. The heavens are being stingy with their light. Take this, too. I’m tired and feeling heavy, but I can’t sleep. Merciful powers, keep away the nightmares that plague me when I rest!"
Give me my sword. Who’s there?,Give me my sword. Who’s there?
A friend.,A friend.
"What, sir, not yet at rest? The king’s a-bed. He hath been in unusual pleasure, and Sent forth great largess to your offices. This diamond he greets your wife withal, In measureless content.","You’re not asleep yet, sir? The king’s in bed. He’s been in an unusually good mood and has granted many gifts to your household and servants. This diamond is a present from him to your wife for her boundless hospitality. (he hands MACBETH a diamond)"
"Being unprepared, Our will became the servant to defect, Which else should free have wrought.","Because we were unprepared for the king’s visit, we weren’t able to entertain him as well as we would have wanted to."
All’s well. I dreamt last night of the three weird sisters:,Everything’s OK. I had a dream last night about the three witches. At least part of what they said about you was true.
"I think not of them. Yet, when we can entreat an hour to serve, We would spend it in some words upon that business, If you would grant the time.","I don’t think about them now. But when we have an hour to spare we can talk more about it, if you’re willing."
At your kind’st leisure.,Whenever you like.
"If you shall cleave to my consent, when ’tis,","If you stick with me, when the time comes, there will be something in it for you."
"So I lose none In seeking to augment it, but still keep My bosom franchised and allegiance clear, I shall be counselled.","I’ll do whatever you say, as long as I can do it with a clear conscience."
Good repose the while!,Rest easy in the meantime.
"Thanks, sir: the like to you!","Thank you, sir. You do the same."
"(to the SERVANT) Go bid thy mistress, when my drink is ready, She strike upon the bell. Get thee to bed.",(to the SERVANT) Go and tell your mistress to strike the bell when my drink is ready. Get yourself to bed.
"Is this a dagger which I see before me, The handle toward my hand? Come, let me clutch thee. Art thou not, fatal vision, sensible To feeling as to sight? Or art thou but A dagger of the mind, a false creation, Proceeding from the heat-oppressèd brain? As this which now I draw. Thou marshall’st me the way that I was going, And such an instrument I was to use. Mine eyes are made the fools o' th' other senses, And on thy blade and dudgeon gouts of blood, Which was not so before. There’s no such thing. It is the bloody business which informs Thus to mine eyes. Now o'er the one half-world The curtained sleep. Witchcraft celebrates Pale Hecate’s offerings, and withered murder, Alarumed by his sentinel, the wolf, Whose howl’s his watch, thus with his stealthy pace, Moves like a ghost. Thou sure and firm-set earth, Hear not my steps, which way they walk, for fear Thy very stones prate of my whereabout, And take the present horror from the time, Words to the heat of deeds too cold breath gives.","Is this a dagger I see in front of me, with its handle pointing toward my hand? (to the dagger) Come, let me hold you. (he grabs at the air in front of him without touching anything) I don’t have you but I can still see you. Fateful apparition, isn’t it possible to touch you as well as see you? Or are you nothing more than a dagger created by the mind, a hallucination from my fevered brain? I can still see you, and you look as real as this other dagger that I’m pulling out now. (he draws a dagger) You’re leading me toward the place I was going already, and I was planning to use a weapon just like you. My eyesight must either be the one sense that’s not working, or else it’s the only one that’s working right. I can still see you, and I see blood splotches on your blade and handle that weren’t there before. (to himself) There’s no dagger here. It’s the murder I’m about to do that’s making me think I see one. Now half the world is asleep and being deceived by evil nightmares. Witches are offering sacrifices to their goddess Hecate. Old man murder, having been roused by the howls of his wolf, walks silently to his destination, moving like Tarquin Tarquin was a Roman prince who sneaked into a Roman wife’s bedroom in the middle of the night and raped her. Tarquin , as quiet as a ghost. (speaking to the ground) Hard ground, don’t listen to the direction of my steps. I don’t want you to echo back where I am and break the terrible stillness of this moment, a silence that is so appropriate for what I’m about to do. While I stay here talking, Duncan lives. The more I talk, the more my courage cools. "
"I go, and it is done. The bell invites me. Hear it not, Duncan, for it is a knell That summons thee to heaven or to hell.","I’m going now. The murder is as good as done. The bell is telling me to do it. Don’t listen to the bell, Duncan, because it summons you either to heaven or to hell."
"That which hath made them drunk hath made me bold. What hath quenched them hath given me fire. Hark! Peace! It was the owl that shrieked, the fatal bellman, Which gives the stern’st good-night. He is about it. Do mock their charge with snores. I have drugged their possets, That death and nature do contend about them, Whether they live or die.","The alcohol that got the servants drunk has made me bold. The same liquor that quenched their thirst has fired me up. Listen! Quiet! That was the owl that shrieked, with a scary “good night” like the bells they ring before they execute people. Macbeth must be killing the king right now. The doors to Duncan’s chamber are open, and the drunk servants make a mockery of their jobs by snoring instead of protecting the king. I put so many drugs in their drinks that you can’t tell if they’re alive or dead."
"(within)     Who’s there? What, ho!",(from offstage) Who’s there? What is it?
"Alack, I am afraid they have awaked, Confounds us. Hark! I laid their daggers ready; He could not miss 'em. Had he not resembled My father as he slept, I had done ’t.","Oh no, I’m afraid the servants woke up, and the murder didn’t happen. For us to attempt murder and not succeed would ruin us. (She hears a noise.) Listen to that! I put the servants' daggers where Macbeth would find them. He couldn’t have missed them. If Duncan hadn’t reminded me of my father when I saw him sleeping, I would have killed him myself."
My husband!,My husband!
I have done the deed. Didst thou not hear a noise?,I have done the deed. Did you hear a noise?
Did not you speak?,I heard the owl scream and the crickets cry. Didn’t you say something?
When?,When?
Now.,Just now.
As I descended?,As I came down?
Ay.,Yes.
Hark! Who lies i' th' second chamber?,Listen! Who’s sleeping in the second chamber?
Donalbain.,Donalbain.
(looking at his hands) This is a sorry sight.,(looking at his bloody hands) This is a sorry sight.
"A foolish thought, to say a sorry sight.",That’s a stupid thing to say.
"There’s one did laugh in ’s sleep, and one cried. “Murder!” That they did wake each other. I stood and heard them. But they did say their prayers, and addressed them","One of the servants laughed in his sleep, and one cried, “Murder!” and they woke each other up. I stood and listened to them, but then they said their prayers and went back to sleep."
There are two lodged together.,Malcolm and Donalbain are asleep in the same room.
"One cried, “God bless us!” and “Amen” the other, As they had seen me with these hangman’s hands. List'ning their fear I could not say “Amen,” When they did say “God bless us!”","One servant cried, “God bless us!” and the other replied, “Amen,” as if they had seen my bloody hands. Listening to their frightened voices, I couldn’t reply “Amen” when they said “God bless us!”"
Consider it not so deeply.,Don’t think about it so much.
"But wherefore could not I pronounce “Amen”? I had most need of blessing, and “Amen” Stuck in my throat.","But why couldn’t I say “Amen”? I desperately needed God’s blessing, but the word “Amen” stuck in my throat."
"These deeds must not be thought After these ways. So, it will make us mad.","We can’t think that way about what we did. If we do, it’ll drive us crazy."
"Macbeth does murder sleep”—the innocent sleep, Sleep that knits up the raveled sleave of care, The death of each day’s life, sore labor’s bath, Balm of hurt minds, great nature’s second course,","I thought I heard a voice cry, “Sleep no more! Macbeth is murdering sleep.” Innocent sleep. Sleep that soothes away all our worries. Sleep that puts each day to rest. Sleep that relieves the weary laborer and heals hurt minds. Sleep, the main course in life’s feast, and the most nourishing."
What do you mean?,What are you talking about?
"Still it cried, “Sleep no more!” to all the house. “Glamis hath murdered sleep, and therefore Cawdor Shall sleep no more. Macbeth shall sleep no more.”","The voice kept crying, “Sleep no more!” to everyone in the house. “Macbeth has murdered sleep, and therefore Macbeth will sleep no more.”"
"Who was it that thus cried? Why, worthy thane, So brainsickly of things. Go get some water, And wash this filthy witness from your hand. Why did you bring these daggers from the place? They must lie there. Go carry them and smear","Who said that? Why, my worthy lord, you let yourself become weak when you think about things in this cowardly way. Go get some water and wash this bloody evidence from your hands. Why did you carry these daggers out of the room? They have to stay there. Go take them back and smear the sleeping guards with the blood."
I’ll go no more: I am afraid to think what I have done; Look on ’t again I dare not.,I can’t go back. I’m afraid even to think about what I’ve done. I can’t stand to look at it again.
"Infirm of purpose! Give me the daggers. The sleeping and the dead Are but as pictures. 'Tis the eye of childhood I’ll gild the faces of the grooms withal, For it must seem their guilt.",Coward! Give me the daggers. Dead and sleeping people can’t hurt you any more than pictures can. Only children are afraid of scary pictures. If Duncan bleeds I’ll paint the servants' faces with his blood. We must make it seem like they’re guilty.
"Whence is that knocking? How is ’t with me when every noise appals me? What hands are here? Ha! They pluck out mine eyes. Clean from my hand? No, this my hand will rather The multitudinous seas incarnadine, Making the green one red.","Where is that knocking coming from? What’s happening to me, that I’m frightened of every noise? (looking at his hands) Whose hands are these? Ha! They’re plucking out my eyes. Will all the water in the ocean wash this blood from my hands? No, instead my hands will stain the seas scarlet, turning the green waters red."
"My hands are of your color, but I shame","My hands are as red as yours, but I would be ashamed if my heart were as pale and weak."
"I hear a knocking At the south entry. Retire we to our chamber. A little water clears us of this deed. How easy is it, then! Your constancy Hath left you unattended.",I hear someone knocking at the south entry. Let’s go back to our bedroom. A little water will wash away the evidence of our guilt. It’s so simple! You’ve lost your resolve.
"Get on your nightgown, lest occasion call us And show us to be watchers. Be not lost So poorly in your thoughts.","Listen! There’s more knocking. Put on your nightgown, in case someone comes and sees that we’re awake. Snap out of your daze."
"To know my deed, ’twere best not know myself.","Rather than have to think about my crime, I’d prefer to be completely unconscious."
Wake Duncan with thy knocking. I would thou couldst.,Wake Duncan with your knocking. I wish you could!
"Here’s a knocking indeed! If a man were porter of hell-gate, he should have old turning the key.","This is a lot of knocking! Come to think of it, if a man were in charge of opening the gates of hell to let people in, he would have to turn the key a lot."
"Knock, knock, knock! Who’s there, i' th' name of Beelzebub? Here’s a farmer that hanged himself on the expectation of plenty. Come in time, have napkins enough about you, here you’ll sweat for ’t.","Knock, knock, knock! (pretending he’s the gatekeeper in hell) Who’s there, in the devil’s name? Maybe it’s a farmer who killed himself because grain was cheap. (talking to the imaginary farmer) You’re here just in time! I hope you brought some handkerchiefs; you’re going to sweat a lot here."
"Knock, knock! Who’s there, in th' other devil’s name? Faith, here’s an equivocator that could swear in both the scales against either scale, who committed treason enough for God’s sake, yet could not equivocate to heaven. O, come in, equivocator.","Knock, knock! Who’s there, in the other devil’s name? Maybe it’s some slick, two-faced con man who lied under oath. But he found out that you can’t lie to God, and now he’s going to hell for perjury. Come on in, con man."
"Knock, knock, knock! Who’s there? Faith, here’s an English tailor come hither for stealing out of a French hose. Come in, tailor. Here you may roast your goose.","Knock, knock, knock! Who’s there? Maybe it’s an English tailor who liked to skimp on the fabric for people’s clothes. But now that tight pants are in fashion he can’t get away with it. Come on in, tailor. You can heat your iron up in here."
"Knock, knock! Never at quiet. What are you? But this place is too cold for hell. I’ll devil-porter it no further. I had thought to have let in some of all professions that go the primrose way to the everlasting bonfire.","Knock, knock! Never a moment of peace! Who are you? Ah, this place is too cold to be hell. I won’t pretend to be the devil’s porter anymore. I was going to let someone from every profession into hell."
"Anon, anon! I pray you, remember the porter.","I’m coming, I’m coming! Please, don’t forget to leave me a tip."
"Was it so late, friend, ere you went to bed, That you do lie so late?","Did you go to bed so late, my friend, that you’re having a hard time getting up now?"
"'Faith sir, we were carousing till the second cock. And drink, sir, is a great provoker of three things.","That’s right sir, we were drinking until A.M., and drink, sir, makes a man do three things."
What three things does drink especially provoke?,What three things does drink make a man do?
"Marry, sir, nose-painting, sleep, and urine. Lechery, sir, it provokes and unprovokes. It provokes the desire, but it takes away the performance. Therefore, much drink may be said to be an equivocator with lechery. It makes him, and it mars him; it sets him on, and it takes him off; it persuades him, and disheartens him; makes him stand to and not stand to; in conclusion, equivocates him in a sleep, and, giving him the lie, leaves him.","Drinking turns your nose red, it puts you to sleep, and it makes you urinate. Lust it turns on but also turns off. What I mean is, drinking stimulates desire but hinders performance. Therefore, too much drink is like a con artist when it comes to your sex drive. It sets you up for a fall. It gets you up but it keeps you from getting off. It persuades you and discourages you. It gives you an erection but doesn’t let you keep it, if you see what I’m saying. It makes you dream about erotic experiences, but then it leaves you asleep and needing to pee."
I believe drink gave thee the lie last night.,I believe drink did all of this to you last night.
"That it did, sir, i' th' very throat on me; but I requited him for his lie, and, I think, being too strong for him, though he took up my legs sometime, yet I made a shift to cast him.","It did, sir. It got me right in the throat. But I got even with drink. I was too strong for it. Although it weakened my legs and made me unsteady, I managed to vomit it out and laid it flat on the ground."
Is thy master stirring?,Is your master awake?
Our knocking has awaked him. Here he comes.,Our knocking woke him up. Here he comes.
"Good morrow, noble sir.","Good morning, noble sir."
"Good morrow, both.",Good morning to both of you.
"Is the king stirring, worthy thane?","Is the king awake, worthy thane?"
Not yet.,Not yet.
He did command me to call timely on him.,He commanded me to wake him up early. I’ve almost missed the time he requested.
I’ll bring you to him.,I’ll bring you to him.
"I know this is a joyful trouble to you, But yet ’tis one.","I know the burden of hosting him is both an honor and a trouble, but that doesn’t mean it’s not a trouble just the same."
The labor we delight in physics pain. This is the door.,The work we enjoy is not really work. This is the door.
For ’tis my limited service.,"I’ll wake him, because that’s my job."
Goes the king hence today?,Is the king leaving here today?
He does. He did appoint so.,He is. He told us to arrange it.
"The night has been unruly. Where we lay, Our chimneys were blown down and, as they say, And prophesying with accents terrible Of dire combustion and confused events New hatched to the woeful time. The obscure bird Clamored the livelong night. Some say the Earth","The night has been chaotic. The wind blew down through the chimneys where we were sleeping. People are saying they heard cries of grief in the air, strange screams of death, and terrible voices predicting catastrophes that will usher in a woeful new age. The owl made noise all night. Some people say that the earth shook as if it had a fever."
'Twas a rough night.,It was a rough night.
My young remembrance cannot parallel A fellow to it.,I’m too young to remember anything like it.
"O horror, horror, horror! Tongue nor heart cannot conceive nor name thee!","Oh, horror, horror, horror! This is beyond words and beyond belief!"
What’s the matter?,What’s the matter?
"Most sacrilegious murder hath broke ope The Lord’s anointed temple, and stole thence The life o' th' building!","The worst thing imaginable has happened. A murderer has broken into God’s temple Macduff compares Duncan’s corpse to a church that has been broken into, which confuses his listeners. God’s temple and stolen the life out of it."
What is ’t you say? “The life”?,What are you talking about? “The life”?
Mean you his majesty?,Do you mean the king?
"With a new Gorgon. Do not bid me speak. See, and then speak yourselves.",Go into the bedroom and see for yourself. What’s in there will make you freeze with horror. Don’t ask me to talk about it. Go look and then do the talking yourselves.
"Awake, awake! Ring the alarum bell. Murder and treason! Shake off this downy sleep, death’s counterfeit, And look on death itself! Up, up, and see The great doom’s image! Malcolm! Banquo! As from your graves rise up, and walk like sprites,","Wake up, wake up! Ring the alarm bell. Murder and treason! Banquo and Donalbain, Malcolm! Wake up! Shake off sleep, which looks like death, and look at death itself! Get up, get up, and look at this image of doomsday! Malcolm! Banquo! Get up from your beds as if you were rising out of your own graves, and walk like ghosts to come witness this horror. Ring the bell."
"What’s the business, That such a hideous trumpet calls to parley The sleepers of the house? Speak, speak!",What’s going on? Why is that terrifying trumpet calling together everyone who’s sleeping in the house? Speak up and tell me!
"O gentle lady, 'Tis not for you to hear what I can speak: Would murder as it fell.","Oh gentle lady, my news isn’t fit for your ears. If I repeated it to you, it would kill you as soon as you heard it."
"O Banquo, Banquo, Our royal master’s murdered!","Oh Banquo, Banquo, the king has been murdered!"
"Woe, alas! What, in our house?","How horrible! What, in our own house?"
"Dear Duff, I prithee, contradict thyself, And say it is not so.","It would be a terrible event no matter where it happened. Dear Macduff, I beg you, tell us you were lying and say it isn’t so."
"Had I but died an hour before this chance, I had lived a blessèd time, for from this instant All is but toys. Renown and grace is dead. The wine of life is drawn, and the mere lees Is left this vault to brag of.","If I had only died an hour before this event I could say I had lived a blessed life. Because from this moment on, there is nothing worth living for. Everything is a sick joke. The graceful and renowned king is dead. The wine of life has been poured out, and only the dregs remain."
What is amiss?,What’s wrong?
"The spring, the head, the fountain of your blood Is stopped; the very source of it is stopped.","You are, but you don’t know it yet. The source from which your royal blood comes has been stopped."
Your royal father’s murdered.,Your royal father is murdered.
"Oh, by whom?",Who did it?
"Those of his chamber, as it seemed, had done ’t. So were their daggers, which unwiped we found Upon their pillows. They stared, and were distracted. No man’s life was to be trusted with them.","It seems that the guards who were supposed to be protecting his chamber did it. Their hands and faces were all covered with blood. So were their daggers, which we found on their pillows, unwiped. They stared at us in confusion. No one’s life should have been entrusted to them."
"Oh, yet I do repent me of my fury,",And yet I still regret the anger that drove me to kill them.
Wherefore did you so?,What did you do that for?
"Who can be wise, amazed, temp'rate, and furious, Loyal and neutral, in a moment? No man. Th' expedition of my violent love His silver skin laced with his golden blood, And his gashed stabs looked like a breach in nature For ruin’s wasteful entrance; there, the murderers, Steeped in the colors of their trade, their daggers That had a heart to love, and in that heart Courage to make ’s love known?","Is it possible to be wise, bewildered, calm, furious, loyal, and neutral all at once? Nobody can do that. The violent rage inspired by my love for Duncan caused me to act before I could think rationally and tell myself to pause. There was Duncan, his white skin all splattered with his precious blood. The gashes where the knives had cut him looked like wounds to nature itself. Then right next to him I saw the murderers, dripping with blood, their daggers rudely covered in gore. Who could have restrained himself, who loved Duncan and had the courage to act on it?"
"Help me hence, ho!","Help me out of here, quickly!"
Look to the lady.,Take care of the lady.
"(aside to DONALBAIN ) Why do we hold our tongues,",(speaking so that only DONALBAIN can hear) Why are we keeping quiet? The two of us have the most to say in this matter.
"(aside to MALCOLM) What should be spoken here, where our fate, Hid in an auger-hole, may rush and seize us? Let’s away. Our tears are not yet brewed.","(speaking so that only MALCOLM can hear) What are we going to say here, where danger may be waiting to strike at us from anywhere? Let’s get out of here. We haven’t even begun to weep yet—but there will be time for that later."
(aside to DONALBAIN) Nor our strong sorrow,(speaking so that only DONALBAIN can hear) And the time hasn’t come yet for us to turn our deep grief into action.
Look to the lady.,Take care of the lady.
"And when we have our naked frailties hid, That suffer in exposure, let us meet And question this most bloody piece of work, To know it further. Fears and scruples shake us. Against the undivulged pretense I fight Of treasonous malice.","When we’re properly dressed for the cold, let’s meet and discuss this bloody crime to see if we can figure anything out. Right now we’re shaken up by fears and doubts. I’m putting myself in God’s hands, and with his help I plan to fight against the secret plot that caused this treasonous murder."
And so do I.,So will I.
So all.,So will we all.
"Let’s briefly put on manly readiness,",Let’s get dressed quickly and then meet in the hall.
Well contented.,Agreed.
What will you do? Let’s not consort with them. To show an unfelt sorrow is an office Which the false man does easy. I’ll to England.,What are you going to do? Let’s not stay here with them. It’s easy for a liar to pretend to feel sorrow when he actually feels none. I’m going to England.
"To Ireland, I. Our separated fortune There’s daggers in men’s smiles. The near in blood, The nearer bloody.","I’ll go to Ireland. We’ll both be safer if we go separate ways. Wherever we go, men will smile at us while hiding daggers. Our closest relatives are the ones most likely to murder us."
"This murderous shaft that’s shot Hath not yet lighted, and our safest way And let us not be dainty of leave-taking, But shift away. There’s warrant in that theft Which steals itself when there’s no mercy left.","We haven’t yet encountered that danger, and the best thing to do is avoid it entirely. With that in mind, let’s get on our horses. We’d better not worry about saying polite good-byes; we should just get away quickly. There’s good reason to escape when there’s no mercy to be found anymore."
"Threescore and ten I can remember well, Within the volume of which time I have seen Hours dreadful and things strange, but this sore night Hath trifled former knowings.","I can remember the past seventy years pretty well, and in all that time I have seen dreadful hours and strange things. But last night’s horrors make everything that came before seem like a joke."
"Ha, good father, Threatens his bloody stage. By th' clock ’tis day, And yet dark night strangles the travelling lamp. Is ’t night’s predominance or the day’s shame That darkness does the face of Earth entomb","Ah yes, old man. You can see the skies. They look like they’re upset about what mankind has been doing, and they’re threatening the Earth with storms. The clock says it’s daytime, but dark night is strangling the sun. Is it because night is so strong, or because day is so weak, that darkness covers the earth when it’s supposed to be light?"
"'Tis unnatural, Even like the deed that’s done. On Tuesday last, A falcon, tow'ring in her pride of place, Was by a mousing owl hawked at and killed.","It’s unnatural, just like the murder that has been committed. Last Tuesday a falcon was circling high in the sky, and it was caught and killed by an ordinary owl that usually goes after mice."
"And Duncan’s horses—a thing most strange and certain— Turned wild in nature, broke their stalls, flung out, Contending 'gainst obedience, as they would Make war with mankind.","And something else strange happened. Duncan’s horses, which are beautiful and swift and the best of their breed, suddenly turned wild and broke out of their stalls. Refusing to be obedient as usual, they acted like they were at war with mankind."
'Tis said they eat each other.,They say the horses ate each other.
"They did so, to th' amazement of mine eyes",I saw it with my own eyes. It was an amazing sight. Here comes the good Macduff.
"How goes the world, sir, now?",How are things going now?
"Why, see you not?",Can’t you see for yourself?
Is ’t known who did this more than bloody deed?,Does anyone know who committed this horrible crime?
Those that Macbeth hath slain.,The servants Macbeth killed.
"Alas, the day! What good could they pretend?",It’s too bad he killed them. What good would it have done those men to kill Duncan?
"They were suborned. Are stol'n away and fled, which puts upon them Suspicion of the deed.","They were paid to betray their master. Malcolm and Donalbain, the king’s two sons, have run away and fled, which makes them the prime suspects."
"'Gainst nature still! Thriftless ambition, that will raven up The sovereignty will fall upon Macbeth.","Everything about this is unnatural! What a stupid ambition, causing a son to kill the father who supports him. Then it looks like Macbeth will become king."
He is already named and gone to Scone To be invested.,He has already been named king and has left for Scone to be crowned.
Where is Duncan’s body?,Where is Duncan’s body?
"The sacred storehouse of his predecessors, And guardian of their bones.","It was carried to Colmekill to be placed in the tomb of his ancestors, where their bones are kept safe."
Will you to Scone?,Are you going to Scone?
"No, cousin, I’ll to Fife.","No, cousin, I’m going to Fife."
"Well, I will thither.","Well, I’ll go to Scone."
Lest our old robes sit easier than our new!,I hope things go well there. Good-bye! And let’s hope things don’t get worse.
"Farewell, father.","Farewell, old man."
God’s benison go with you and with those That would make good of bad and friends of foes.,"May God’s blessing go with you and with all who turn bad into good, and enemies into friends!"
"Thou hast it now: king, Cawdor, Glamis, all, As the weird women promised, and I fear Thou played’st most foully for ’t. Yet it was said It should not stand in thy posterity, Of many kings. If there come truth from them— As upon thee, Macbeth, their speeches shine— Why, by the verities on thee made good, May they not be my oracles as well,","Now you have it all: you’re the king, the thane of Cawdor, and the thane of Glamis, just like the weird women promised you. And I suspect you cheated to win these titles. But it was also prophesied that the crown would not go to your descendants, and that my sons and grandsons would be kings instead. If the witches tell the truth—which they did about you—maybe what they said about me will come true too. But shhh! I’ll shut up now."
Here’s our chief guest.,(indicating BANQUO) Here’s our most important guest.
"If he had been forgotten, It had been as a gap in our great feast, And all-thing unbecoming.","If we forgot him, our big celebration wouldn’t be complete, and that wouldn’t be any good."
And I’ll request your presence.,"(to BANQUO) Tonight we’re having a ceremonial banquet, and I want you to be there."
"Let your highness Command upon me, to the which my duties Are with a most indissoluble tie Forever knit.","Whatever your highness commands me to do, it is always my duty to do it."
Ride you this afternoon?,Are you going riding this afternoon?
"Ay, my good lord.","Yes, my good lord."
"We should have else desired your good advice— Which still hath been both grave and prosperous— In this day’s council, but we’ll take tomorrow.","We would have liked to have heard your good advice, which has always been serious and helpful, at the council today, but we’ll wait until tomorrow. Are you riding far?"
"As far, my lord, as will fill up the time 'Twixt this and supper. Go not my horse the better, I must become a borrower of the night For a dark hour or twain.","I’m going far enough that I’ll be riding from now until dinner. Unless my horse goes faster than expected, I will be back an hour or two after sunset."
Fail not our feast.,Don’t miss our feast.
"My lord, I will not.","My lord, I won’t miss it."
"We hear our bloody cousins are bestowed In England and in Ireland, not confessing Their cruel parricide, filling their hearers With strange invention. But of that tomorrow, Craving us jointly. Hie you to horse. Adieu, Till your return at night. Goes Fleance with you?","We hear that the princes, those murderers, have hidden in England and Ireland. They haven’t confessed to cruelly murdering their own father, and they’ve been making up strange lies to tell their hosts. But we can talk more about that tomorrow, when we’ll discuss matters of state that concern us both. Hurry up and get to your horse. Good-bye, until you return tonight. Is Fleance going with you?"
"Ay, my good lord. Our time does call upon ’s.","Yes, my good lord. It’s time we hit the road."
"I wish your horses swift and sure of foot, Farewell.","I hope your horses are fast and surefooted. And with that, I send you to them. Farewell."
"Let every man be master of his time Till seven at night. To make society The sweeter welcome, we will keep ourself","Everybody may do as they please until seven o'clock tonight. In order to make your company even more enjoyable, I’m going to keep to myself until suppertime. Until then, God be with you!"
"Sirrah, a word with you. Attend those men Our pleasure?","(to the SERVANT) You there, let me have a word with you. Are those men waiting for me?"
"They are, my lord, without the palace gate.","They’re waiting outside the palace gate, my lord."
Bring them before us.,Bring them to me.
"But to be safely thus. Our fears in Banquo Stick deep, and in his royalty of nature Reigns that which would be feared. 'Tis much he dares, And to that dauntless temper of his mind To act in safety. There is none but he Whose being I do fear, and under him My genius is rebuked, as it is said Mark Antony’s was by Caesar. He chid the sisters And bade them speak to him. Then, prophetlike, They hailed him father to a line of kings. Upon my head they placed a fruitless crown And put a barren scepter in my grip, No son of mine succeeding. If ’t be so, For Banquo’s issue have I filed my mind; For them the gracious Duncan have I murdered; Put rancors in the vessel of my peace Given to the common enemy of man, To make them kings, the seed of Banquo kings! Rather than so, come fate into the list, And champion me to th' utterance. Who’s there?","To be the king is nothing if I’m not safe as the king. I’m very afraid of Banquo. There’s something noble about him that makes me fear him. He’s willing to take risks, and his mind never stops working. He has the wisdom to act bravely but also safely. I’m not afraid of anyone but him. Around him, my guardian angel is frightened, just as Mark Antony’s angel supposedly feared Octavius Caesar. Banquo chided the witches when they first called me king, asking them to tell him his own future. Then, like prophets, they named him the father to a line of kings. They gave me a crown and a scepter that I can’t pass on. Someone outside my family will take these things away from me, since no son of mine will take my place as king. If this is true, then I’ve tortured my conscience and murdered the gracious Duncan for Banquo’s sons. I’ve ruined my own peace for their benefit. I’ve handed over my everlasting soul to the devil so that they could be kings. Banquo’s sons, kings! Instead of watching that happen, I will challenge fate to battle and fight to the death. Who’s there!"
Now go to the door and stay there till we call.,Now go to the door and stay there until I call for you.
Was it not yesterday we spoke together?,Wasn’t it just yesterday that we spoke to each other?
"It was, so please your highness.","It was yesterday, your highness."
"Well then, now Have you considered of my speeches? Know That it was he, in the times past, which held you Our innocent self. This I made good to you In our last conference, passed in probation with you, How you were borne in hand, how crossed, the instruments, Who wrought with them, and all things else that might Say, “Thus did Banquo.”","Well, did you think about what I said? You should know that it was Banquo who made your lives hell for so long, which you always thought was my fault. But I was innocent. I showed you the proof at our last meeting. I explained how you were deceived, how you were thwarted, the things that were used against you, who was working against you, and a lot of other things that would convince even a half-wit or a crazy person to say, “Banquo did it!”"
You made it known to us.,You explained it all.
"I did so, and went further, which is now Our point of second meeting. Do you find Your patience so predominant in your nature To pray for this good man and for his issue, Whose heavy hand hath bowed you to the grave And beggared yours forever?","I did that and more, which brings me to the point of this second meeting. Are you so patient and forgiving that you’re going to let him off the hook? Are you so pious that you would pray for this man and his children, a man who has pushed you toward an early grave and put your family in poverty forever?"
"We are men, my liege.","We are men, my lord."
"Ay, in the catalogue ye go for men, Shoughs, water-rugs, and demi-wolves are clept All by the name of dogs. The valued file Distinguishes the swift, the slow, the subtle, The housekeeper, the hunter, every one Hath in him closed, whereby he does receive Particular addition, from the bill That writes them all alike. And so of men. Now, if you have a station in the file, And I will put that business in your bosoms, Whose execution takes your enemy off, Grapples you to the heart and love of us, Who wear our health but sickly in his life,","Yes, you’re part of the species called men. Just as hounds and greyhounds, mongrels, spaniels, mutts, shaggy lapdogs, swimming dogs, and wolf-dog crossbreeds are all dogs. But if you list the different kinds of dogs according to their qualities, you can distinguish which breeds are fast or slow, which ones are clever, which ones are watchdogs, and which ones hunters. You can classify each dog according to the natural gifts that separate it from all other dogs. It’s the same with men. Now, if you occupy some place in the list of men that isn’t down at the very bottom, tell me. Because if that’s the case, I will tell you a plan that will get rid of your enemy and bring you closer to me. As long as Banquo lives, I am sick. I’ll be healthy when he is dead."
"I am one, my liege, Whom the vile blows and buffets of the world Have so incensed that I am reckless what I do to spite the world.","My lord, I’ve been so kicked around by the world, and I’m so angry, that I don’t even care what I do."
"And I another That I would set my life on any chance, To mend it or be rid on ’t.","I’m the same. I’m so sick of bad luck and trouble that I’d risk my life on any bet, as long as it would either fix my life or end it once and for all."
Both of you Know Banquo was your enemy.,You both know Banquo was your enemy.
"True, my lord.","It’s true, my lord."
"So is he mine; and in such bloody distance Against my near’st of life. And though I could With barefaced power sweep him from my sight And bid my will avouch it, yet I must not, For certain friends that are both his and mine, Who I myself struck down. And thence it is, That I to your assistance do make love, Masking the business from the common eye For sundry weighty reasons.","He’s my enemy too, and I hate him so much that every minute he’s alive it eats away at my heart. Since I’m king, I could simply use my power to get rid of him. But I can’t do that, because he and I have friends in common whom I need, so I have to be able to moan and cry over his death in public even though I’ll be the one who had him killed. That’s why I need your help right now. I have to hide my real plans from the public eye for many important reasons."
Perform what you command us.,"We’ll do what you want us to, my lord."
Though our lives—,Though our lives—
"Your spirits shine through you. Within this hour at most I will advise you where to plant yourselves, Acquaint you with the perfect spy o' th' time, And something from the palace; always thought That I require a clearness. And with him— To leave no rubs nor botches in the work— Fleance, his son, that keeps him company, Than is his father’s, must embrace the fate Of that dark hour. Resolve yourselves apart. I’ll come to you anon.","(interrupts him) I can see the determination in your eyes. Within the next hour I’ll tell you where to go and exactly when to strike. It must be done tonight, away from the palace. Always remember that I must be free from suspicion. For the plan to work perfectly, you must kill both Banquo and his son, Fleance, who keeps him company. Getting rid of Fleance is as important to me as knocking off Banquo. Each of you should make up your own mind about whether you’re going to do this. I’ll come to you soon."
"We are resolved, my lord.","We have decided, my lord. We’re in."
I’ll call upon you straight. Abide within.,I’ll call for you soon. Stay inside.
"It is concluded. Banquo, thy soul’s flight, If it find heaven, must find it out tonight.","The deal is closed. Banquo, if your soul is going to make it to heaven, tonight’s the night."
Is Banquo gone from court?,Has Banquo left the court?
"Ay, madam, but returns again tonight.","Yes, madam, but he’ll be back tonight."
Say to the king I would attend his leisure For a few words.,Go tell the king I want to talk to him for a few minutes.
"Madam, I will.","No problem, madam."
"Naught’s had, all’s spent, Where our desire is got without content. 'Tis safer to be that which we destroy Than by destruction dwell in doubtful joy.","If you get what you want and you’re still not happy, you’ve spent everything and gained nothing. It’s better to be the person who gets murdered than to be the killer and be tormented with anxiety."
"Of sorriest fancies your companions making, Using those thoughts which should indeed have died With them they think on? Things without all remedy Should be without regard. What’s done is done.","What’s going on, my lord? Why are you keeping to yourself, with only your sad thoughts to keep you company? Those thoughts should have died when you killed the men you’re thinking about. If you can’t fix it, you shouldn’t give it a second thought. What’s done is done."
"She’ll close and be herself whilst our poor malice Remains in danger of her former tooth. But let the frame of things disjoint, both the worlds suffer, Ere we will eat our meal in fear, and sleep That shake us nightly. Better be with the dead, Whom we, to gain our peace, have sent to peace, Than on the torture of the mind to lie In restless ecstasy. Duncan is in his grave. Treason has done his worst; nor steel nor poison, Malice domestic, foreign levy, nothing Can touch him further.","We have slashed the snake but not killed it. It will heal and be as good as new, and we’ll be threatened by its fangs once again. But the universe can fall apart, and heaven and earth crumble, before I’ll eat my meals in fear and spend my nights tossing and turning with these nightmares I’ve been having. I’d rather be dead than endure this endless mental torture and harrowing sleep deprivation. We killed those men and sent them to rest in peace so that we could gain our own peace. Duncan lies in his grave, through with life’s troubles, and he’s sleeping well. We have already done the worst we can do to him with our treason. After that, nothing can hurt him further—not weapons, poison, rebellion, invasion, or anything else."
"Come on, gentle my lord, Among your guests tonight.","Come on, relax, dear. Put on a happy face and look cheerful and agreeable for your guests tonight."
"So shall I, love, And so, I pray, be you. Let your remembrance Apply to Banquo; present him eminence, Both with eye and tongue: unsafe the while that we And make our faces vizards to our hearts, Disguising what they are.","That’s exactly what I’ll do, my love, and I hope you’ll do the same. Give Banquo your special attention. Talk to him and look at him in a way that will make him feel important. We’re in a dangerous situation, where we have to flatter him and hide our true feelings."
You must leave this.,You have to stop talking like this.
"Oh, full of scorpions is my mind, dear wife! Thou know’st that Banquo, and his Fleance, lives.","Argh! I feel like my mind is full of scorpions, my dear wife. You know that Banquo and his son Fleance are still alive."
But in them nature’s copy’s not eterne.,But they can’t live forever.
"There’s comfort yet; they are assailable. Then be thou jocund. Ere the bat hath flown His cloistered flight, ere to black Hecate’s summons The shard-borne beetle with his drowsy hums A deed of dreadful note.","That’s comforting. They can be killed, it’s true. So be cheerful. Before the bat flies through the castle, and before the dung beetle makes his little humming noise to tell us it’s nighttime, a dreadful deed will be done."
What’s to be done?,What are you going to do?
"Be innocent of the knowledge, dearest chuck, Till thou applaud the deed. Come, seeling night, Scarf up the tender eye of pitiful day Cancel and tear to pieces that great bond Which keeps me pale. Light thickens, and the crow Makes wing to th' rooky wood. Good things of day begin to droop and drowse; Thou marvel’st at my words: but hold thee still. Things bad begun make strong themselves by ill. So, prithee, go with me.","It’s better you don’t know about it until after it’s done, when you can applaud it. (to the night) Come, night, and blindfold the kindhearted day. Use your bloody and invisible hand to tear up Banquo’s lease on life, which keeps me in fear. (to himself) The sky’s getting dark, and the crow is returning home to the woods. The gentle creatures of the day are falling asleep, while night’s predators are waking up to look for their prey. (to LADY MACBETH) You seem surprised at my words, but don’t question me yet. Bad deeds force you to commit more bad deeds. So please, come with me."
But who did bid thee join with us?,But who told you to come here and join us?
Macbeth.,Macbeth.
"He needs not our mistrust, since he delivers Our offices and what we have to do",We can trust this guy. He was given exactly the same orders we were.
"Then stand with us. The west yet glimmers with some streaks of day. Now spurs the lated traveler apace To gain the timely inn, and near approaches",Then stay with us. There’s still a bit of daylight in the sky. Now all the late travellers are hurrying to reach their inns. Banquo is almost here.
"Hark, I hear horses.",Listen! I hear horses.
"(within) Give us a light there, ho!","(from offstage) Hey, give us some light here!"
Then ’tis he: the rest That are within the note of expectation Already are i' th' court.,That must be him. The rest of the king’s guests are already inside.
His horses go about.,You can hear his horses moving around as the servants take them to the stables.
Almost a mile; but he does usually— Make it their walk.,"It’s almost a mile to the palace gate, but Banquo, like everybody else, usually walks from here to the palace."
"A light, a light!",Here comes a light! Here comes a light!
'Tis he.,That’s him.
Stand to ’t.,Prepare yourselves.
It will be rain tonight.,It will rain tonight.
Let it come down.,Then let the rain come down.
"O treachery! Fly, good Fleance, fly, fly, fly!","Oh, this is treachery! Get out of here, good Fleance, run, run, run! Someday you can get revenge.—Oh, you bastard!"
Who did strike out the light?,Who put out the light?
Was ’t not the way?,Wasn’t that the best thing to do?
There’s but one down. The son is fled.,There’s only one body here. The son ran away.
We have lost best half of our affair.,We failed in half of our mission.
"Well, let’s away and say how much is done.","Well, let’s get out of here and tell Macbeth what we did accomplish."
"You know your own degrees; sit down. At first And last, the hearty welcome.","You know your own ranks, so you know where to sit. Sit down. From the highest to the lowest of you, I bid you a hearty welcome."
Thanks to your majesty.,Thanks to your majesty.
Ourself will mingle with society And play the humble host. We will require her welcome.,"I will walk around and mingle with all of you, playing the humble host. My wife will stay in her royal chair, but at the appropriate time I will have her welcome you all."
"Pronounce it for me, sir, to all our friends, For my heart speaks they are welcome.","Say welcome to all of our friends for me, sir, for in my heart they are all welcome."
"See, they encounter thee with their hearts' thanks. Be large in mirth. Anon we’ll drink a measure The table round.",And they respond to you with their hearts as well. The table is full on both sides. I will sit here in the middle. Be free and happy. Soon we will toast around the table.
(aside to FIRST MURDERER) There’s blood upon thy face.,(approaching the door and speaking to the MURDERER) There’s blood on your face.
'Tis Banquo’s then.,Then it must be Banquo’s.
Is he dispatched?,I’d rather see his blood splattered on your face than flowing through his veins. Did you finish him off?
"My lord, his throat is cut. That I did for him.","My lord, his throat is cut. I did that to him."
Thou art the best o' th' cutthroats: Yet he’s good that did the like for Fleance.,"You are the best of the cutthroats. But whoever did the same to Fleance must also be good. If you cut both their throats, then you are the absolute best."
"Most royal sir, Fleance is ’scaped.","Most royal sir, Fleance has escaped."
"Then comes my fit again. I had else been perfect, Whole as the marble, founded as the rock, As broad and general as the casing air. To saucy doubts and fears.—But Banquo’s safe?","Now I’m scared again. Otherwise I would have been perfect, as solid as a piece of marble, as firm as a rock, as free as the air itself. But now I’m all tangled up with doubts and fears. But Banquo’s been taken care of?"
"Ay, my good lord. Safe in a ditch he bides, With twenty trenchèd gashes on his head, The least a death to nature.","Yes, my good lord. He’s lying dead in a ditch, with twenty deep gashes in his head, any one of which would have been enough to kill him."
Thanks for that. Hath nature that in time will venom breed; No teeth for th' present. Get thee gone. Tomorrow We’ll hear ourselves again.,"Thanks for that. The adult snake lies in the ditch. The young snake that escaped will in time become poisonous and threatening, but for now he has no fangs. Get out of here. I’ll talk to you again tomorrow."
"My royal lord, You do not give the cheer. The feast is sold 'Tis given with welcome. To feed were best at home; From thence, the sauce to meat is ceremony; Meeting were bare without it.","My royal lord, you’re not entertaining the guests. If you don’t make your guests know they’re welcome, they’ll feel like they’re paying for their meal. When you just want to eat, it’s better to do that at home. When you’re eating out with people, you need to have a little more ceremony. Otherwise dinner parties would be boring."
"Sweet remembrancer! Now, good digestion wait on appetite,","It’s nice of you to remind me. (raising a glass to toast his guests) Since good digestion requires a good appetite, and good health requires both of those, here’s to good appetites, good digestion, and good health!"
May ’t please your highness sit.,"Why don’t you have a seat, your highness?"
"Here had we now our country’s honor roofed, Were the graced person of our Banquo present, Who may I rather challenge for unkindness","We would have all the nobility of Scotland gathered under one roof, if only Banquo were here. I hope it turns out that he’s late out of rudeness, and not because something bad has happened to him."
"His absence, sir, Lays blame upon his promise. Please ’t your highness To grace us with your royal company?","His absence means he’s broken his promise, sir. If it pleases you, your highness, why don’t you sit with us and grace us with your royal company?"
The table’s full.,The table’s full.
"Here is a place reserved, sir.","Here’s an empty seat, sir."
Where?,Where?
"Here, my good lord. What is ’t that moves your highness?","(pointing to where the GHOST sits) Here, my good lord. What’s wrong, your highness?"
Which of you have done this?,(seeing the GHOST) Which one of you did this?
"What, my good lord?","What, my good lord?"
(to GHOST) Thou canst not say I did it. Never shake Thy gory locks at me.,(to the GHOST) You can’t say I did it. Don’t shake your bloody head at me.
"Gentlemen, rise. His highness is not well.","Gentlemen, stand up. His highness is not well."
"Sit, worthy friends. My lord is often thus And hath been from his youth. Pray you, keep seat. The fit is momentary; upon a thought He will again be well. If much you note him, Feed and regard him not. (aside to MACBETH) Are you a man?","Sit down, worthy friends. My husband is often like this, and he has been since he was a child. Please stay seated. This is just a brief fit. In a moment he’ll be well again. If you pay too much attention to him you’ll make him angry, and that will make his convulsions go on longer. Eat your dinner and pay no attention to him. (speaking so that only MACBETH can hear) Are you a man?"
"Ay, and a bold one, that dare look on that Which might appall the devil.","Yes, and a brave one, who dares to look at something that would frighten the devil."
"O proper stuff! This is the very painting of your fear. Led you to Duncan. Oh, these flaws and starts, Impostors to true fear, would well become A woman’s story at a winter’s fire, Authorized by her grandam. Shame itself! You look but on a stool.","Oh, that’s nonsense! This is just another one of the hallucinations you always get when you’re afraid. This is like that floating dagger you said was leading you toward Duncan. These outbursts of yours don’t even look like real fear. They’re more like how you would act if you were a woman telling a scary story by the fireside in front of her grandmother. Shame on you! Why are you making these faces? When the vision passes, you’ll see that you’re just looking at a stool."
"Prithee, see there! Behold! Look! Lo! How say you? Why, what care I? If thou canst nod, speak too. If charnel houses and our graves must send Shall be the maws of kites.","Please, just look over there. Look! Look! See! (to the GHOST) What do you have to say? What do I care? If you can nod, then speak too. If the dead are going to return from their graves, then there’s nothing to stop the birds from eating the bodies. So there’s no point in our burying people."
"What, quite unmanned in folly?","What, has your foolishness paralyzed you completely?"
"If I stand here, I saw him.","As sure as I’m standing here, I saw him."
"Fie, for shame!",Nonsense!
"Blood hath been shed ere now, i' th' olden time, Ere humane statute purged the gentle weal; Too terrible for the ear. The time has been That, when the brains were out, the man would die, And there an end. But now they rise again With twenty mortal murders on their crowns Than such a murder is.","In ancient times, before there were laws to make the land safe and peaceful, a lot of blood was spilled. Yes, and since then murders have been committed that are too awful to talk about. It used to be that when you knocked a man’s brains out he would just die, and that would be it. But now they rise from the dead with twenty fatal head wounds and push us off our stools. This haunting business is even stranger than murder."
"My worthy lord, Your noble friends do lack you.","My worthy lord, your noble friends miss your company."
"I do forget. Do not muse at me, my most worthy friends. To those that know me. Come, love and health to all. Then I’ll sit down. Give me some wine. Fill full.","I forgot about them. (to the guests) Don’t be alarmed on my account, my most worthy friends. I have a strange disorder, which no longer shocks those who know me well. (raising his glass to toast the company) Come, let’s drink a toast: love and health to you all. Now I’ll sit down. Give me some wine. Fill up my cup."
"I drink to the general joy o' th' whole table, And to our dear friend Banquo, whom we miss; And all to all.","I drink to the happiness of everyone at the table, and to our dear friend Banquo, whom we miss. I wish he were here! Let’s drink to everyone here, and to Banquo. Now, everybody, drink"
"Our duties, and the pledge.","Hear, hear."
"(seeing the GHOST) Avaunt, and quit my sight! Let the earth hide thee. Thy bones are marrowless, thy blood is cold. Thou hast no speculation in those eyes","(to the GHOST) Go! And get out of my sight! Stay in your grave. There’s no marrow in your bones, and your blood is cold. You’re staring at me with eyes that have no power to see."
"Think of this, good peers, But as a thing of custom. 'Tis no other; Only it spoils the pleasure of the time.","Good friends, think of this as nothing more than a strange habit. It’s nothing else. Too bad it’s spoiling our pleasure tonight."
"What man dare, I dare. Approach thou like the rugged Russian bear, Take any shape but that, and my firm nerves Shall never tremble. Or be alive again, And dare me to the desert with thy sword. If trembling I inhabit then, protest me Unreal mockery, hence!","I am as brave as any other man. Come at me in the form of a rugged Russian bear, an armor-plated rhinoceros, or a tiger from Iran. Take any shape other than the one you have now and I will never tremble in fear. Or come back to life again and challenge me to a duel in some deserted place. If I tremble then, you can call me a little girl. Get out of here, you horrible ghost, you hallucination. Get out!"
"Why so, being gone,",I am a man again. Pray you sit still.
"Why so, being gone, I am a man again. Pray you sit still.","Look, now that it’s gone, I’m a man again. Please, remain seated."
"You have displaced the mirth, broke the good meeting, With most admired disorder.",You have ruined our good cheer and disrupted the gathering by making a spectacle of yourself.
"Can such things be, Without our special wonder? You make me strange Even to the disposition that I owe, When now I think you can behold such sights, And keep the natural ruby of your cheeks,","(to the guests) Can things like this happen so suddenly without making us all astonished? You make me feel like I don’t know myself, when I see you looking at these terrible things and keeping a straight face, while my face has gone white with fear."
"What sights, my lord?","What things, my lord?"
"I pray you, speak not. He grows worse and worse. Question enrages him. At once, good night. Stand not upon the order of your going, But go at once.","Please, don’t speak to him. He’s getting worse and worse. Talk makes him crazy. Everybody, please leave right now. Don’t bother exiting in the order of your rank, but just leave right away."
Attend his majesty!,Good night. I hope the king recovers soon!
A kind good night to all!,A kind good night to all!
"It will have blood, they say. Blood will have blood. Stones have been known to move, and trees to speak. By magot pies and choughs and rooks brought forth The secret’st man of blood.—What is the night?","There’s an old saying: the dead will have their revenge. Gravestones have been known to move, and trees to speak, to bring guilty men to justice. The craftiest murderers have been exposed by the mystical signs made by crows and magpies. How late at night is it?"
"Almost at odds with morning, which is which.",It’s almost morning. You can’t tell whether it’s day or night.
How say’st thou that Macduff denies his person,What do you think about the fact that Macduff refuses to come to me when I command him?
"Did you send to him, sir?","Did you send for him, sir?"
"I hear it by the way; but I will send. There’s not a one of them but in his house I keep a servant fee’d. I will tomorrow— And betimes I will—to the weird sisters. By the worst means, the worst. For mine own good, All causes shall give way. I am in blood Stepped in so far that, should I wade no more, Returning were as tedious as go o'er. Which must be acted ere they may be scanned.","I’ve heard about this indirectly, but I will send for him. In every one of the lords' households I have a servant paid to spy for me. Tomorrow, while it’s still early, I will go see the witches. They will tell me more, because I’m determined to know the worst about what’s going to happen. My own safety is the only important thing now. I have walked so far into this river of blood that even if I stopped now, it would be as hard to go back to being good as it is to keep killing people. I have some schemes in my head that I’m planning to put into action. I have to do these things before I have a chance to think about them."
"You lack the season of all natures, sleep.",You haven’t slept.
"Come, we’ll to sleep. My strange and self-abuse Is the initiate fear that wants hard use.","Yes, let’s go to sleep. My strange self-delusions just come from inexperience. We’re still just beginners when it comes to crime."
"Why, how now, Hecate! You look angerly.","What’s wrong, Hecate? You look angry."
"Have I not reason, beldams as you are? Saucy and overbold, how did you dare To trade and traffic with Macbeth And I, the mistress of your charms, The close contriver of all harms, Was never called to bear my part, Or show the glory of our art? Hath been but for a wayward son, Spiteful and wrathful, who, as others do, Loves for his own ends, not for you. But make amends now. Get you gone, Meet me i' th' morning. Thither he Will come to know his destiny. Your vessels and your spells provide, Your charms and everything beside. Unto a dismal and a fatal end. Great business must be wrought ere noon. Upon the corner of the moon There hangs a vap'rous drop profound. And that distilled by magic sleights Shall raise such artificial sprites As by the strength of their illusion Shall draw him on to his confusion.","Don’t I have a reason to be angry, you disobedient hags? How dare you give Macbeth riddles and prophecies about his future without telling me? I am your boss and the source of your powers. I am the one who secretly decides what evil things happen, but you never called me to join in and show off my own powers. And what’s worse, you’ve done all this for a man who behaves like a spoiled brat, angry and hateful. Like all spoiled sons, he chases after what he wants and doesn’t care about you. But you can make it up to me. Go away now and in the morning meet me in the pit by the river in hell. Macbeth will go there to learn his destiny. You bring your cauldrons, your spells, your charms, and everything else. I’m about to fly away. I’ll spend tonight working to make something horrible happen. I have a lot to do before noon. An important droplet is hanging from the corner of the moon. I’ll catch it before it falls to the ground. When I work it over with magic spells, the drop will produce magical spirits that will trick Macbeth with illusions."
"His hopes 'bove wisdom, grace, and fear. And you all know, security Is mortals' chiefest enemy.","He will be fooled into thinking he is greater than fate, he will mock death, and he will think he is above wisdom, grace, and fear. As you all know, overconfidence is man’s greatest enemy."
"Hark! I am called. My little spirit, see,","Listen! I’m being called. Look, my little spirit is sitting in a foggy cloud waiting for me."
"Come, let’s make haste; she’ll soon be back again.","Come on, let’s hurry. She’ll be back again soon."
"My former speeches have but hit your thoughts, Which can interpret farther. Only I say Things have been strangely borne. The gracious Duncan Was pitied of Macbeth. Marry, he was dead. Whom, you may say, if ’t please you, Fleance killed, For Fleance fled. Men must not walk too late. Who cannot want the thought how monstrous It was for Malcolm and for Donalbain How it did grieve Macbeth! Did he not straight In pious rage the two delinquents tear That were the slaves of drink and thralls of sleep? Was not that nobly done? Ay, and wisely too, To hear the men deny ’t. So that, I say, He has borne all things well. And I do think That had he Duncan’s sons under his key— As, an’t please heaven, he shall not—they should find But, peace! For from broad words, and 'cause he failed His presence at the tyrant’s feast, I hear Macduff lives in disgrace. Sir, can you tell Where he bestows himself?","What I’ve already said shows you we think alike, so you can draw your own conclusions. All I’m saying is that strange things have been going on. Macbeth pitied Duncan—after Duncan was dead. And Banquo went out walking too late at night. If you like, we can say that Fleance must have killed him, because Fleance fled the scene of the crime. Clearly, men should not go out walking too late! And who can help thinking how monstrous it was for Malcolm and Donalbain to kill their gracious father? Such a heinous crime—how it saddened Macbeth Lennox speaks sarcastically throughout this speech, making it clear that he thinks Macbeth is guilty of the murders. Macbeth ! Wasn’t it loyal of him to kill those two servants right away, while they were still drunk and asleep? That was the right thing to do, wasn’t it? Yes, and it was the wise thing, too, because we all would have been outraged to hear those two deny their crime. Considering all this, I think Macbeth has handled things well. If he had Duncan’s sons in prison—which I hope won’t happen—they would find out how awful the punishment is for those who kill their fathers, and so would Fleance. But enough of that. I hear that Macduff is out of favor with the king because he speaks his mind too plainly, and because he failed to show up at Macbeth’s feast. Can you tell me where he’s hiding himself?"
"The son of Duncan— Lives in the English court and is received Of the most pious Edward with such grace That the malevolence of fortune nothing Takes from his high respect. Thither Macduff To wake Northumberland and warlike Siward, That by the help of these—with Him above To ratify the work—we may again Give to our tables meat, sleep to our nights, Do faithful homage and receive free honors. All which we pine for now. And this report Hath so exasperated the king that he Prepares for some attempt of war.","Duncan’s son Malcolm, whose birthright and throne Macbeth has stolen, lives in the English court. There, the saintly King Edward treats Malcolm so well that despite Malcolm’s misfortunes, he’s not deprived of respect. Macduff went there to ask King Edward for help. He wants Edward to help him form an alliance with the people of Northumberland and their lord, Siward. Macduff hopes that with their help—and with the help of God above—he may once again put food on our tables, bring peace back to our nights, free our feasts and banquets from violent murders, allow us to pay proper homage to our king, and receive honors freely. Those are the things we pine for now. Macbeth has heard this news and he is so angry that he’s preparing for war."
Sent he to Macduff?,Did he tell Macduff to return to Scotland?
"He did, and with an absolute “Sir, not I,” The cloudy messenger turns me his back, And hums, as who should say “You’ll rue the time That clogs me with this answer.”","He did, but Macduff told the messenger, “No way.” The messenger scowled and rudely turned his back on Macduff, as if to say, “You’ll regret the day you gave me this answer.”"
"And that well might His wisdom can provide. Some holy angel Fly to the court of England and unfold His message ere he come, that a swift blessing May soon return to this our suffering country","That might well keep Macduff away from Scotland. Some holy angel should go to the court of England and give Macduff a message. He should return quickly to free our country, which is suffering under a tyrant!"
I’ll send my prayers with him.,I’ll send my prayers with him.
Thrice the brinded cat hath mewed.,The tawny cat has meowed three times.
"Thrice, and once the hedge-pig whined.",Three times. And the hedgehog has whined once.
"Harpier cries, “'Tis time, ’tis time.”","My spirit friend, Harpier, is yelling, “It’s time, it’s time!”"
"Round about the cauldron go, Toad, that under cold stone Days and nights has thirty-one Sweltered venom sleeping got, Boil thou first i' th' charmèd pot.","Dance around the cauldron and throw in the poisoned entrails. (holding up a toad) You’ll go in first—a toad that sat under a cold rock for a month, oozing poison from its pores."
"Fire burn, and cauldron bubble.","Double, double toil and trouble, Fire burn, and cauldron bubble."
"Fillet of a fenny snake, In the cauldron boil and bake. Eye of newt and toe of frog, Adder’s fork and blind-worm’s sting, Lizard’s leg and owlet’s wing, For a charm of powerful trouble, Like a hell-broth boil and bubble.","(holding something up) We’ll boil you in the cauldron next—a slice of swamp snake. All the rest of you in too: a newt’s eye, a frog’s tongue, fur from a bat, a dog’s tongue, the forked tongue of an adder, the stinger of a burrowing worm, a lizard’s leg, an owl’s wing. (speaking to the ingredients) Make a charm to cause powerful trouble, and boil and bubble like a broth of hell."
Fire burn and cauldron bubble.,"Double, double toil and trouble, Fire burn and cauldron bubble."
"Scale of dragon, tooth of wolf, Witches' mummy, maw and gulf Of the ravined salt-sea shark, Liver of blaspheming Jew, Gall of goat and slips of yew Slivered in the moon’s eclipse, Nose of Turk and Tartar’s lips, Ditch-delivered by a drab, Make the gruel thick and slab. Add thereto a tiger’s chaudron, For the ingredients of our cauldron.","Here come some more ingredients: the scale of a dragon, a wolf’s tooth, a witch’s mummified flesh, the gullet and stomach of a ravenous shark, a root of hemlock that was dug up in the dark, a Jew’s liver, a goat’s bile, some twigs of yew that were broken off during a lunar eclipse, a Turk’s nose, a Tartar’s lips, the finger of a baby that was strangled as a prostitute gave birth to it in a ditch. (to the ingredients) Make this potion thick and gluey. (to the other WITCHES) Now let’s add a tiger’s entrails to the mix."
Fire burn and cauldron bubble.,"Double, double toil and trouble, Fire burn and cauldron bubble."
"Cool it with a baboon’s blood, Then the charm is firm and good.",We’ll cool the mixture with baboon blood. After that the charm is finished.
"Oh well done! I commend your pains, And now about the cauldron sing, Like elves and fairies in a ring, Enchanting all that you put in.","Well done! I admire your efforts, and all of you will share the rewards. Now come sing around the cauldron like a ring of elves and fairies, enchanting everything you put in."
"By the pricking of my thumbs, Open, locks, Whoever knocks.","I can tell that something wicked is coming by the tingling in my thumbs. Doors, open up for whoever is knocking!"
"How now, you secret, black, and midnight hags? What is ’t you do?","What’s going on here, you secret, evil, midnight hags? What are you doing?"
A deed without a name.,Something there isn’t a word for.
"Howe'er you come to know it—answer me. Though you untie the winds and let them fight Against the churches, though the yeasty waves Confound and swallow navigation up, Though castles topple on their warders' heads, Though palaces and pyramids do slope Their heads to their foundations, though the treasure Of nature’s germens tumble all together, To what I ask you.","I don’t know how you know the things you do, but I insist that you answer my questions. I command you in the name of whatever dark powers you serve. I don’t care if you unleash violent winds that tear down churches, make the foamy waves overwhelm ships and send sailors to their deaths, flatten crops and trees, make castles fall down on their inhabitants' heads, make palaces and pyramids collapse, and mix up everything in nature. Tell me what I want to know."
Speak.,Speak.
Demand.,Demand.
We’ll answer.,We’ll answer.
"Say, if th' hadst rather hear it from our mouths, Or from our masters'.",Would you rather hear these things from our mouths or from our master’s?
Call 'em. Let me see 'em.,Call them. Let me see them.
Her nine farrow; grease that’s sweaten From the murderer’s gibbet throw Into the flame.,Pour in the blood of a sow who has eaten her nine offspring. Take the sweat of a murderer on the gallows and throw it into the flame.
"Come, high or low;","Come, high or low spirits. Show yourself and what you do."
"Tell me, thou unknown power—","Tell me, you unknown power—"
He knows thy thought. Hear his speech but say thou nought.,"He can read your thoughts. Listen, but don’t speak."
Macbeth! Macbeth! Macbeth! Beware Macduff. Beware the thane of Fife. Dismiss me. Enough.,Macbeth! Macbeth! Macbeth! Beware Macduff. Beware the thane of Fife. Let me go. Enough.
Thou hast harped my fear aright. But one word more—,"Whatever you are, thanks for your advice. You have guessed exactly what I feared. But one word more—"
He will not be commanded. Here’s another More potent than the first.,"He will not be commanded by you. Here’s another, stronger than the first."
Macbeth! Macbeth! Macbeth!—,Macbeth! Macbeth! Macbeth!
"Had I three ears, I’d hear thee.",If I had three ears I’d listen with all three.
"Be bloody, bold, and resolute. Laugh to scorn The power of man, for none of woman born Shall harm Macbeth.","Be violent, bold, and firm. Laugh at the power of other men, because nobody born from a woman will ever harm Macbeth."
Descends,The SECOND APPARITION descends.
"But yet I’ll make assurance double sure, And take a bond of fate. Thou shalt not live, That I may tell pale-hearted fear it lies, And sleep in spite of thunder.","Then I don’t need to kill Macduff. I have no reason to fear him. But even so, I’ll make doubly sure. I’ll guarantee my own fate by having you killed, Macduff. That way I can conquer my own fear and sleep easy at night."
"That rises like the issue of a king, And wears upon his baby-brow the round And top of sovereignty?",What is this spirit that looks like the son of a king and wears a crown on his young head?
Listen but speak not to ’t.,Listen but don’t speak to it.
"Be lion-mettled, proud, and take no care Macbeth shall never vanquished be until Great Birnam Wood to high Dunsinane Hill Shall come against him.","Be brave like the lion and proud. Don’t even worry about who hates you, who resents you, and who conspires against you. Macbeth will never be defeated until Birnam Wood marches to fight you at Dunsinane Hill."
"That will never be. Who can impress the forest, bid the tree Rebellious dead, rise never till the wood Of Birnam rise, and our high-placed Macbeth Shall live the lease of nature, pay his breath To time and mortal custom. Yet my heart Can tell so much: shall Banquo’s issue ever Reign in this kingdom?","That will never happen. Who can command the forest and make the trees pull their roots out of the earth? These were sweet omens! Good! My murders will never come back to threaten me until the forest of Birnam gets up and moves, and I will be king for my entire natural life. But my heart is still throbbing to know one thing. Tell me, if your dark powers can see this far: will Banquo’s sons ever reign in this kingdom?"
Seek to know no more.,Don’t try to find out more.
"I will be satisfied. Deny me this, Why sinks that cauldron? And what noise is this?","I demand to be satisfied. If you refuse, let an eternal curse fall on you. Let me know. Why is that cauldron sinking? And what is that music?"
Show.,Show.
Show.,Show.
Show.,Show.
Come like shadows; so depart!,Show him and make him grieve. Come like shadows and depart in the same way!
"Thou art too like the spirit of Banquo. Down! Thy crown does sear mine eyeballs. And thy hair, Thou other gold-bound brow, is like the first. Why do you show me this? A fourth? Start, eyes! What, will the line stretch out to th' crack of doom? Another yet? A seventh? I’ll see no more. And yet the eighth appears, who bears a glass That twofold balls and treble scepters carry. Horrible sight! Now I see ’tis true; For the blood-boltered Banquo smiles upon me And points at them for his.","You look too much like the ghost of Banquo. Go away!     (to the first) Your crown hurts my eyes. (to the second) Your blond hair, which looks like another crown underneath the one you’re wearing, looks just like the first king’s hair. Now I see a third king who looks just like the second. Filthy hags! Why are you showing me this? A fourth! My eyes are bulging out of their sockets! Will this line stretch on forever? Another one! And a seventh! I don’t want to see any more. And yet an eighth appears, holding a mirror in which I see many more men. And some are carrying double balls and triple scepters, meaning they’re kings of more than one country! Horrible sight! Now I see it is true, they are Banquo’s descendants. Banquo, with his blood-clotted hair, is smiling at me and pointing to them as his."
"What, is this so?",What? Is this true?
"Stands Macbeth thus amazedly? Come, sisters, cheer we up his sprites, And show the best of our delights. I’ll charm th' air to give a sound, That this great king may kindly say, Our duties did his welcome pay.","Yes, this is true, but why do you stand there so dumbfounded? Come, sisters, let’s cheer him up and show him our talents. I will charm the air to produce music while you all dance around like crazy, so this king will say we did our duty and entertained him."
Where are they? Gone? Let this pernicious hour Stand aye accursèd in the calendar!,"Where are they? Gone? Let this evil hour be marked forever in the calendar as cursed. (calls to someone offstage) You outside, come in!"
What’s your grace’s will?,What does your grace want?
Saw you the weird sisters?,Did you see the weird sisters?
"No, my lord.","No, my lord."
Came they not by you?,Didn’t they pass by you?
"No, indeed, my lord.","No, indeed, my lord."
"Infected be the air whereon they ride, And damned all those that trust them! I did hear",The air on which they ride is infected. Damn all those who trust them! I heard the galloping of horses. Who was it that came here?
"'Tis two or three, my lord, that bring you word Macduff is fled to England.","Two or three men, my lord, who brought the message that Macduff has fled to England."
Fled to England?,Fled to England?
"Ay, my good lord.","Yes, my good lord."
"The flighty purpose never is o'ertook Unless the deed go with it. From this moment The very firstlings of my heart shall be The firstlings of my hand. And even now, The castle of Macduff I will surprise, Seize upon Fife, give to th' edge o' th' sword His wife, his babes, and all unfortunate souls That trace him in his line. No boasting like a fool. But no more sights!—Where are these gentlemen? Come, bring me where they are.","Time, you thwart my dreadful plans. Unless a person does something the second he thinks of it, he’ll never get a chance to do it. From now on, as soon as I decide to do something I’m going to act immediately. In fact, I’ll start following up my thoughts with actions right now. I’ll raid Macduff’s castle, seize the town of Fife, and kill his wife, his children, and anyone else unfortunate enough to stand in line for his inheritance. No more foolish talk. I will do this deed before I lose my sense of purpose. But no more spooky visions!—Where are the messengers? Come, bring me to them."
What had he done to make him fly the land?,What did he do that made him flee this land?
"You must have patience, madam.","You have to be patient, madam."
"He had none. His flight was madness. When our actions do not, Our fears do make us traitors.","He had no patience. He was crazy to run away. Even if you’re not a traitor, you’re going to look like one if you run away."
You know not,You don’t know whether it was wisdom or fear that made him flee.
"Wisdom! To leave his wife, to leave his babes, His mansion and his titles in a place From whence himself does fly? He loves us not; He wants the natural touch. For the poor wren, Her young ones in her nest, against the owl. All is the fear and nothing is the love, As little is the wisdom, where the flight So runs against all reason.","How could it be wisdom! To leave his wife, his children, his house, and his titles in a place so unsafe that he himself flees it! He doesn’t love us. He lacks the natural instinct to protect his family. Even the fragile wren, the smallest of birds, will fight against the owl when it threatens her young ones in the nest. His running away has everything to do with fear and nothing to do with love. And since it’s so unreasonable for him to run away, it has nothing to do with wisdom either."
"My dearest coz, He is noble, wise, judicious, and best knows The fits o' th' season. I dare not speak much further; But cruel are the times when we are traitors And do not know ourselves; when we hold rumor But float upon a wild and violent sea Each way and none. I take my leave of you. Shall not be long but I’ll be here again. Things at the worst will cease, or else climb upward Blessing upon you.","My dearest relative, I’m begging you, pull yourself together. As for your husband, he is noble, wise, and judicious, and he understands what the times require. It’s not safe for me to say much more than this, but times are bad when people get denounced as traitors and don’t even know why. In times like these, we believe frightening rumors but we don’t even know what we’re afraid of. It’s like being tossed around on the ocean in every direction, and finally getting nowhere. I’ll say good-bye now. It won’t be long before I’m back. When things are at their worst they have to stop, or else improve to the way things were before. My young cousin, I put my blessing upon you."
"Fathered he is, and yet he’s fatherless.","He has a father, and yet he is fatherless."
"I am so much a fool, should I stay longer It would be my disgrace and your discomfort.","I have to go. If I stay longer, I’ll embarrass you and disgrace myself by crying. I’m leaving now."
"Sirrah, your father’s dead. And what will you do now? How will you live?","Young man, your father’s dead. What are you going to do now? How are you going to live?"
"As birds do, Mother.","I will live the way birds do, Mother."
"What, with worms and flies?",What? Are you going to start eating worms and flies?
"With what I get, I mean, and so do they.","I mean I will live on whatever I get, like birds do."
The pitfall nor the gin.,You’d be a pitiful bird. You wouldn’t know enough to be afraid of traps.
"Why should I, mother? Poor birds they are not set for. My father is not dead, for all your saying.","Why should I be afraid of them, Mother? If I’m a pitiful bird, like you say, hunters won’t want me. No matter what you say, my father is not dead."
"Yes, he is dead. How wilt thou do for a father?","Yes, he is dead. What are you going to do for a father?"
"Nay, how will you do for a husband?","Maybe you should ask, what will you do for a husband?"
"Why, I can buy me twenty at any market.","Oh, I can buy twenty husbands at any market."
Then you’ll buy 'em to sell again.,"If so, you’d be buying them to sell again."
"Thou speak’st with all thy wit; and yet, i' faith, With wit enough for thee.","You talk like a child, but you’re very smart anyway."
"Was my father a traitor, Mother?","Was my father a traitor, Mother?"
"Ay, that he was.","Yes, he was."
What is a traitor?,What is a traitor?
"Why, one that swears and lies.",Someone who makes a promise and breaks it.
And be all traitors that do so?,And is everyone who swears and lies a traitor?
Every one that does so is a traitor and must be hanged.,Everyone who does so is a traitor and should be hanged.
And must they all be hanged that swear and lie?,And should everyone who makes promises and breaks them be hanged?
Every one.,Everyone.
Who must hang them?,Who should hang them?
"Why, the honest men.",The honest men.
"Then the liars and swearers are fools, for there are liars and swearers enough to beat the honest men and hang up them.","Then the liars are fools, for there are enough liars in the world to beat up the honest men and hang them."
"Now, God help thee, poor monkey! But how wilt thou do for a father?","(laughing) Heaven help you for saying that, boy! (sad again) But what will you do without a father?"
"If he were dead, you’d weep for him. If you would not, it were a good sign that I should quickly have a new father.","If he were dead, you’d be weeping for him. If you aren’t weeping, it’s a good sign that I’ll soon have a new father."
"Poor prattler, how thou talk’st!","Silly babbler, how you talk!"
"Bless you, fair dame! I am not to you known, I doubt some danger does approach you nearly. If you will take a homely man’s advice, Be not found here. Hence with your little ones. To fright you thus methinks I am too savage; Which is too nigh your person. Heaven preserve you! I dare abide no longer.","Bless you, fair lady! You don’t know me, but I know you’re an important person. I’m afraid something dangerous is coming toward you. If you’ll take a simple man’s advice, don’t be here when it arrives. Go away and take your children. I feel bad for scaring you like this, but it would be much worse for me to let you come to harm. And harm is getting close! Heaven keep you safe!"
"Whither should I fly? I have done no harm. But I remember now Is often laudable, to do good sometime Accounted dangerous folly. Why then, alas, Do I put up that womanly defense, To say I have done no harm?","Where should I go? I haven’t done anything wrong. But I have to remember that I’m here on Earth, where doing evil is often praised, and doing good is sometimes a stupid and dangerous mistake. So then why should I offer this womanish defense that I’m innocent?"
What are these faces?,Who are these men?
Where is your husband?,Where is your husband?
"I hope, in no place so unsanctified Where such as thou mayst find him.",I hope he’s not anywhere so disreputable that thugs like you can find him.
He’s a traitor.,He’s a traitor.
"Thou liest, thou shag-haired villain!","You’re lying, you shaggy-haired villain!"
"(Stabbing him)     What, you egg? Young fry of treachery!","What’s that, you runt? (stabbing him) Young son of a traitor!"
"Run away, I pray you!","He has killed me, Mother. Run away, I beg you!"
Let us seek out some desolate shade and there Weep our sad bosoms empty.,Let’s seek out some shady place where we can sit down alone and cry our hearts out.
"Let us rather Hold fast the mortal sword and, like good men, Bestride our downfall'n birthdom. Each new morn Strike heaven on the face, that it resounds As if it felt with Scotland and yelled out Like syllable of dolor.","Instead of crying, let’s keep hold of our swords and defend our fallen homeland like honorable men. Each day new widows howl, new orphans cry, and new sorrows slap heaven in the face, until it sounds like heaven itself feels Scotland’s anguish and screams in pain."
"What I believe I’ll wail; What know believe, and what I can redress, What you have spoke, it may be so perchance. This tyrant, whose sole name blisters our tongues, Was once thought honest. You have loved him well. He hath not touched you yet. I am young, but something To offer up a weak, poor, innocent lamb T' appease an angry god.","I will avenge whatever I believe is wrong. And I’ll believe whatever I’m sure is true. And I’ll put right whatever I can when the time comes. What you just said may perhaps be true. This tyrant, whose mere name is so awful it hurts us to say it, was once considered an honest man. You were one of his favorites. He hasn’t done anything to harm you yet. I’m inexperienced, but maybe you’re planning to win Macbeth’s favor by betraying me to him. It would be smart to offer someone poor and innocent like me as a sacrificial lamb to satisfy an angry god like Macbeth."
I am not treacherous.,I am not treacherous.
"But Macbeth is. In an imperial charge. But I shall crave your pardon. That which you are, my thoughts cannot transpose. Angels are bright still, though the brightest fell. Though all things foul would wear the brows of grace,","But Macbeth is. Even someone with a good and virtuous nature might give way to a royal command. But I beg your pardon. My fears can’t actually make you evil. Angels are still bright even though Lucifer, the brightest angel, fell from heaven. Even though everything evil wants to look good, good still has to look good too."
I have lost my hopes.,I have lost my hope of convincing you to fight against Macbeth.
"Perchance even there where I did find my doubts. Why in that rawness left you wife and child, Those precious motives, those strong knots of love, Without leave-taking? I pray you, But mine own safeties. You may be rightly just, Whatever I shall think.","Maybe you lost your hopes about me where I found my doubts about you. Why did you leave your wife and child vulnerable—the most precious things in your life, those strong bonds of love? How could you leave them behind? But I beg you, don’t interpret my suspicions as slander against you. You must understand that I want to protect myself. You may really be honest, no matter what I think."
"Bleed, bleed, poor country! Great tyranny, lay thou thy basis sure, For goodness dare not check thee. Wear thou thy wrongs; I would not be the villain that thou think’st For the whole space that’s in the tyrant’s grasp, And the rich East to boot.","Bleed, bleed, poor country! Great tyrant, go ahead and build yourself up, because good people are afraid to stand up to you. Enjoy everything you stole, because your title is safe! Farewell, lord. I wouldn’t be the villain you think I am even if I were offered all of Macbeth’s kingdom and the riches of the East too."
"Be not offended. I speak not as in absolute fear of you. It weeps, it bleeds, and each new day a gash Is added to her wounds. I think withal There would be hands uplifted in my right; And here from gracious England have I offer When I shall tread upon the tyrant’s head, Or wear it on my sword, yet my poor country Shall have more vices than it had before, More suffer, and more sundry ways than ever,","Don’t be offended. I don’t completely distrust you. I do think Scotland is sinking under Macbeth’s oppression. Our country weeps, it bleeds, and each day a fresh cut is added to her wounds. I also think there would be many people willing to fight for me. The English have promised me thousands of troops. But even so, when I have Macbeth’s head under my foot, or stuck on the end of my sword, then my poor country will be plagued by worse evil than it was before. It will suffer worse and in more ways than ever under the reign of the king who follows Macbeth."
What should he be?,Who are you talking about?
"It is myself I mean, in whom I know All the particulars of vice so grafted That, when they shall be opened, black Macbeth Will seem as pure as snow, and the poor state With my confineless harms.","I’m talking about myself. I know I have so many vices that when people see all of them exposed, evil Macbeth will seem as pure as snow in comparison, and poor Scotland will call him a sweet lamb when they compare him to me and my infinite evils."
Not in the legions Of horrid hell can come a devil more damned In evils to top Macbeth.,Even in hell you couldn’t find a devil worse than Macbeth.
"I grant him bloody, Luxurious, avaricious, false, deceitful, That has a name. But there’s no bottom, none, In my voluptuousness. Your wives, your daughters, Your matrons, and your maids could not fill up The cistern of my lust, and my desire That did oppose my will. Better Macbeth Than such an one to reign.","I admit that he’s murderous, lecherous, greedy, lying, deceitful, violent, malicious, and guilty of every sin that has a name. But there is no end, absolutely none, to my sexual desires. Your wives, your daughters, your old women, and your young maids together could not satisfy my lust. My desire would overpower all restraints and anyone who stood in my way. It would be better for Macbeth to rule than someone like me."
"Boundless intemperance In nature is a tyranny. It hath been The untimely emptying of the happy throne To take upon you what is yours. You may Convey your pleasures in a spacious plenty And yet seem cold; the time you may so hoodwink. We have willing dames enough. There cannot be As will to greatness dedicate themselves, Finding it so inclined.","Endless greed and lust in a man’s nature is a kind of tyranny. It has caused the downfall of many kings. But don’t be afraid to take the crown that belongs to you. You can find a way to satisfy your desires in secret, while still appearing virtuous. You can deceive everyone. There are more than enough willing women around. Your lust can’t possibly be so strong that you’d use up all the women willing to give themselves to the king once they find out he wants them."
"With this there grows In my most ill-composed affection such I should cut off the nobles for their lands, Desire his jewels and this other’s house. And my more-having would be as a sauce To make me hunger more, that I should forge Destroying them for wealth.","Along with being full of lust, I’m also incredibly greedy. If I became king, I would steal the nobles' lands, taking jewels from one guy and houses from another. The more I had, the greedier I would grow, until I’d invent false quarrels with my good and loyal subjects, destroying them so I could get my hands on their wealth."
"This avarice Sticks deeper, grows with more pernicious root Than summer-seeming lust, and it hath been The sword of our slain kings. Yet do not fear; Of your mere own. All these are portable, With other graces weighed.",The greed you’re talking about is worse than lust because you won’t outgrow it. Greed has been the downfall of many kings. But don’t be afraid. Scotland has enough treasures to satisfy you out of your own royal coffers. These bad qualities are bearable when balanced against your good sides.
"But I have none. The king-becoming graces, As justice, verity, temperance, stableness, Devotion, patience, courage, fortitude, I have no relish of them but abound In the division of each several crime, Acting it many ways. Nay, had I power, I should Uproar the universal peace, confound All unity on earth.","But I don’t have any good sides. I don’t have a trace of the qualities a king needs, such as justice, truth, moderation, stability, generosity, perseverance, mercy, humility, devotion, patience, courage, and bravery. Instead, I overflow with every variation of all the different vices. No, if I had power I would take world peace and throw it down to hell."
"O Scotland, Scotland!","Oh Scotland, Scotland!"
"If such a one be fit to govern, speak. I am as I have spoken.","If someone like me is fit to be king, let me know. I really am exactly as I have described myself to you."
"Fit to govern? With an untitled tyrant bloody-sceptered, When shalt thou see thy wholesome days again, Since that the truest issue of thy throne By his own interdiction stands accursed, Was a most sainted king. The queen that bore thee, Oftener upon her knees than on her feet, Died every day she lived. Fare thee well! These evils thou repeat’st upon thyself Thy hope ends here!","(to MALCOLM) Fit to be king? You’re not fit to live!—Oh miserable nation, ruled by a usurping, murderous tyrant, when will you see peaceful days again? The man who has a legal right to the throne is, by his own admission, a cursed man and a disgrace to the royal family.—Your royal father Duncan was a virtuous king. Your mother spent more time on her knees in prayer than she did standing up, and she lived a life of absolute piety. Good-bye. The evils you have described inside yourself have driven me out of Scotland forever. Oh my heart, your hope is dead!"
"Macduff, this noble passion, Child of integrity, hath from my soul Wiped the black scruples, reconciled my thoughts To thy good truth and honor. Devilish Macbeth Into his power, and modest wisdom plucks me From overcredulous haste. But God above Deal between thee and me, for even now I put myself to thy direction and The taints and blames I laid upon myself, For strangers to my nature. I am yet Unknown to woman, never was forsworn, Scarcely have coveted what was mine own, The devil to his fellow, and delight No less in truth than life. My first false speaking Was this upon myself. What I am truly, Is thine and my poor country’s to command.","Macduff, this passionate outburst, which proves your integrity, has removed my doubts about you and made me realize that you really are trustworthy and honorable. That devil Macbeth has tried many times to trick me and lure me into his power, and prudence prevents me from believing people too quickly. But with God as my witness, I will let myself be guided by you, and I take back my confession. I take back all the bad things I said about myself, because none of those flaws are really part of my character. I’m still a virgin. I have never told a lie. I barely care about what I already own, let alone feel jealous of another’s possessions. I have never broken a promise. I wouldn’t betray the devil himself. I love truth as much as I love life. The lies I told about my character are actually the first false words I have ever spoken. The person who I really am is ready to serve you and our poor country."
"Old Siward, with ten thousand warlike men, Already at a point, was setting forth. Now we’ll together, and the chance of goodness Be like our warranted quarrel! Why are you silent?","Indeed, before you arrived here, old Siward, with ten thousand soldiers already prepared for battle, was making his way here. Now we will fight Macbeth together, and may the chances of our success be as great as the justice of our cause! Why are you silent?"
'Tis hard to reconcile.,It’s hard to make sense of such different stories.
"Well, more anon.—Comes the king forth, I pray you?","Well, we’ll speak more soon. (to the DOCTOR) Is King Edward coming out?"
"Ay, sir; there are a crew of wretched souls That stay his cure. Their malady convinces Such sanctity hath heaven given his hand— They presently amend.","Yes, sir. A crowd of sick people is waiting for him to heal them. Their illness confounds the most advanced techniques of modern medicine, but when he touches them, they heal immediately because of the power granted to him by heaven."
"I thank you, doctor.","Thank you, doctor."
What’s the disease he means?,What disease is he talking about?
"'Tis called the evil. A most miraculous work in this good king, I have seen him do. How he solicits heaven, Himself best knows, but strangely visited people, All swoll'n and ulcerous, pitiful to the eye, The mere despair of surgery, he cures, Put on with holy prayers. And, ’tis spoken,","It’s called the evil. Edward’s healing touch is a miracle that I have seen him perform many times during my stay in England. How he receives these gifts from heaven, only he can say. But he cures people with strange conditions—all swollen, plagued by ulcers, and pitiful to look at, patients who are beyond the help of surgery—by placing a gold coin around their necks and saying holy prayers over them."
"To the succeeding royalty he leaves The healing benediction. With this strange virtue, He hath a heavenly gift of prophecy, That speak him full of grace.","They say that he bequeaths this ability to heal to his royal descendants. Along with this strange power, he also has the gift of prophecy and various other abilities. All of these signs mark him as a man graced by God."
"See, who comes here?",Who’s that coming over here?
"My countryman, but yet I know him not.","By his dress I can tell he’s my countryman, but I don’t recognize him."
"My ever-gentle cousin, welcome hither.","My noble kinsman, welcome."
"I know him now.—Good God, betimes remove",I recognize him now. May God alter the circumstances that keep us apart!
"Sir, amen.","Hello, sir."
Stands Scotland where it did?,Is Scotland the same as when I left it?
"Alas, poor country! Almost afraid to know itself. It cannot Be called our mother, but our grave, where nothing, But who knows nothing, is once seen to smile; Are made, not marked; where violent sorrow seems A modern ecstasy. The dead man’s knell Is there scarce asked for who, and good men’s lives Expire before the flowers in their caps,","Alas, our poor country! It’s too frightened to look at itself. Scotland is no longer the land where we were born; it’s the land where we’ll die. Where no one ever smiles except for the fool who knows nothing. Where sighs, groans, and shrieks rip through the air but no one notices. Where violent sorrow is a common emotion. When the funeral bells ring, people no longer ask who died. Good men die before the flowers in their caps wilt. They die before they even fall sick."
"Oh, relation Too nice and yet too true!","Oh, your report is too poetic, but it sounds so true!"
What’s the newest grief?,What is the most recent news?
That of an hour’s age doth hiss the speaker. Each minute teems a new one.,Even news an hour old is old news. Every minute another awful thing happens.
How does my wife?,How is my wife?
"Why, well.",She’s well.
And all my children?,And all my children?
Well too.,They’re well too.
The tyrant has not battered at their peace?,Macbeth hasn’t attacked them?
"No, they were well at peace when I did leave 'em.",They were at peace Lady Macduff and the children are “well” and “at peace” in the sense that they’re dead. at peace when I left them.
Be not a niggard of your speech. How goes ’t?,Don’t be stingy with your words. What’s the news?
"When I came hither to transport the tidings, Which I have heavily borne, there ran a rumor Which was to my belief witnessed the rather For that I saw the tyrant’s power afoot. Now is the time of help. Your eye in Scotland Would create soldiers, make our women fight,","While I was coming here to tell you my sad news, I heard rumors that many good men are arming themselves to rebel against Macbeth. When I saw Macbeth’s army on the move, I knew the rumors must be true. Now is the time when we need your help. Your presence in Scotland would inspire people to fight. Even the women would fight to rid themselves of Macbeth’s oppression."
Be ’t their comfort We are coming thither. Gracious England hath Lent us good Siward and ten thousand men; An older and a better soldier none That Christendom gives out.,Let them be comforted—I’m returning to Scotland. Gracious King Edward has sent us noble Siward and ten thousand soldiers. There is no soldier more experienced or successful than Siward in the entire Christian world.
"Would I could answer That would be howled out in the desert air, Where hearing should not latch them.",I wish I could repay this happy news with good news of my own. But I have some news that should be howled in a barren desert where nobody can hear it.
"What concern they? The general cause, or is it a fee-grief Due to some single breast?",What is this news about? Does it affect all of us? Or just one of us?
No mind that’s honest Pertains to you alone.,"No decent man can keep from sharing in the sorrow, but my news affects you alone."
"If it be mine, Keep it not from me. Quickly let me have it.","If it’s for me, don’t keep it from me. Let me have it now."
"Let not your ears despise my tongue forever, That ever yet they heard.","I hope you won’t hate me forever after I say these things, because I will soon fill your ears with the most dreadful news you have ever heard."
Hum! I guess at it.,I think I can guess what you’re about to say.
"Your castle is surprised, your wife and babes Savagely slaughtered. To relate the manner, Were, on the quarry of these murdered deer","Your castle was attacked. Your wife and children were savagely slaughtered. If I told you how they were killed, it would cause you so much pain that it would kill you too, and add your body to the pile of murdered corpses."
"Merciful heaven! What, man! Ne'er pull your hat upon your brows. Give sorrow words. The grief that does not speak Whispers the o'erfraught heart and bids it break.","Merciful heaven! (to MACDUFF) Come on, man, don’t keep your grief hidden. Put your sorrow into words. The grief you keep inside you will whisper in your heart until it breaks."
My children too?,They killed my children too?
"Wife, children, servants, all that could be found.","They killed your wife, your children, your servants, anyone they could find."
And I must be from thence! My wife killed too?,And I had to be away! My wife was killed too?
I have said.,I said she was.
Be comforted. To cure this deadly grief.,Take comfort. Let’s cure this awful grief by taking revenge on Macbeth.
"He has no children. All my pretty ones? Did you say all? O hell-kite! All? What, all my pretty chickens and their dam","He doesn’t have children. All my pretty little children? Did you say all? Oh, that bird from hell! All of them? What, all my children and their mother dead in one fell swoop?"
Dispute it like a man.,Fight it like a man.
"I shall do so, But I must also feel it as a man. I cannot but remember such things were And would not take their part? Sinful Macduff, They were all struck for thee! Naught that I am, Not for their own demerits, but for mine, Fell slaughter on their souls. Heaven rest them now.","I will. But I also have to feel it like a man. I can’t help remembering the things that were most precious to me. Did heaven watch the slaughter and not send down any help? Sinful Macduff, they were killed because of you! As wicked as I am, they were slaughtered because of me, not because of anything they did. May God give their souls rest."
"Convert to anger. Blunt not the heart, enrage it.",Let this anger sharpen your sword. Transform your grief into anger. Don’t block the feelings in your heart; let them loose as rage.
"Oh, I could play the woman with mine eyes And braggart with my tongue! But, gentle heavens, Cut short all intermission. Front to front Within my sword’s length set him; if he ’scape, Heaven forgive him too.","I could go on weeping like a woman and bragging about how I will avenge them! But gentle heavens, don’t keep me waiting. Bring me face to face with Macbeth, that devil of Scotland. Put him within the reach of my sword, and if he escapes, may heaven forgive him as well!"
"This tune goes manly. Come, go we to the king. Our power is ready; Our lack is nothing but our leave. Macbeth Put on their instruments. Receive what cheer you may. The night is long that never finds the day.","Now you sound like a man. Come on, let’s go see King Edward. The army is ready. All we have to do now is say goodbye to the king. Macbeth is ripe for the picking. We’ll be acting as God’s agents. Cheer up as much as you can. A new day will come at last."
I have two nights watched with you but can perceive no truth in your report. When was it she last walked?,"I’ve stayed up with you for two nights now, and I haven’t seen any evidence of what you were talking about. When was the last time you saw her sleepwalking?"
"Since his majesty went into the field, I have seen her rise from her bed, throw her nightgown upon her, unlock her closet, take forth paper, fold it, write upon ’t, read it, afterwards seal it, and again return to bed; yet all this while in a most fast sleep.","Since Macbeth went to war, I have seen her rise from her bed, put on her nightgown, unlock her closet, take out some paper, fold it, write on it, read it, seal it up, and then return to bed, remaining asleep the entire time."
"A great perturbation in nature, to receive at once the benefit of sleep, and do the line>effects of watching. In this slumbery agitation, besides her walking and other actual performances, what, at any time, have you heard her say?","It’s unnatural to be asleep and act as if you’re awake. When she is like this, besides walking and performing various activities, have you heard her say anything?"
"That, sir, which I will not report after her.","She says something, sir, but I will not repeat it to you."
"You may to me, and ’tis most meet you should.",You can tell me. You really should.
"Neither to you nor any one, having no witness to confirm my speech.","I will not confess it to you nor to anyone else, because there was no one else to witness her speech."
"Lo you, here she comes. This is her very guise; and, upon my life, fast asleep. Observe her, stand close.","Look, here she comes! This is exactly how she always looks, and—I swear it—she is fast asleep. Watch her. Keep hidden."
How came she by that light?,How did she get that candle?
"Why, it stood by her. She has light by her continually. 'Tis her command.",It stands by her bedside. She always has to have a light next to her. Those are her orders.
You see her eyes are open.,"You see, her eyes are open."
"Ay, but their sense is shut.","Yes, but they don’t see anything."
"What is it she does now? Look, how she rubs her hands.",What’s she doing now? Look how she rubs her hands.
It is an accustomed action with her to seem thus washing her hands. I have known her continue in this a quarter of an hour.,She often does that. She looks like she’s washing her hands. I’ve seen her do that before for as long as fifteen minutes.
Yet here’s a spot.,There’s still a spot here.
"Hark! She speaks. I will set down what comes from her, to satisfy my remembrance the more strongly.","Listen! She’s talking. I’ll write down what she says, so I’ll remember it better."
"Out, damned spot! Out, I say!—One, two. Why, then, ’tis time to do ’t. Hell is murky!—Fie, my lord, fie! A soldier, and afeard? What need we fear who knows it, when none can call our power to account?—Yet who would have thought the old man to have had so much blood in him.","(rubbing her hands) Come out, damned spot! Out, I command you! One, two. OK, it’s time to do it now.—Hell is murky!—Nonsense, my lord, nonsense! You are a soldier, and yet you are afraid? Why should we be scared, when no one can lay the guilt upon us?—But who would have thought the old man would have had so much blood in him?"
Do you mark that?,Did you hear that?
"The thane of Fife had a wife. Where is she now?—What, will these hands ne'er be clean?—No more o' that, my lord, no more o' that. You mar all with this starting.","The thane of Fife had a wife. Where is she now?—What, will my hands never be clean?—No more of that, my lord, no more of that. You’ll ruin everything by acting startled like this."
"Go to, go to. You have known what you should not.",Now look what you’ve done. You’ve heard something you shouldn’t have.
"She has spoke what she should not, I am sure of that. Heaven knows what she has known.","She said something she shouldn’t have said, I’m sure of that. Heaven knows what secrets she’s keeping."
"Here’s the smell of the blood still. All the perfumes of Arabia will not sweeten this little hand. Oh, Oh, Oh!","I still have the smell of blood on my hand. All the perfumes of Arabia couldn’t make my little hand smell better. Oh, oh, oh!"
What a sigh is there! The heart is sorely charged.,What a heavy sigh! Her heart is carrying a heavy weight.
I would not have such a heart in my bosom for the dignity of the whole body.,I wouldn’t want a heart like hers even if you made me queen.
"Well, well, well.","Well, well, well."
"Pray God it be, sir.","I hope what she’s saying is well, sir!"
This disease is beyond my practice. Yet I have known those which have walked in their sleep who have died holily in their beds.,This disease is beyond my medical skills. But I have known people who sleepwalked and weren’t guilty of anything.
"Wash your hands. Put on your nightgown. Look not so pale.—I tell you yet again, Banquo’s buried; he cannot come out on ’s grave.","Wash your hands. Put on your nightgown. Don’t look so frightened. I tell you again, Banquo is buried. He cannot come out of his grave."
Even so?,Is this true?
"To bed, to bed. There’s knocking at the gate. Come, come, come, come. Give me your hand. What’s done cannot be undone.—To bed, to bed, to bed!","To bed, to bed! There’s a knocking at the gate. Come, come, come, come, give me your hand. What’s done cannot be undone. To bed, to bed, to bed!"
Will she go now to bed?,Will she go to bed now?
Directly.,"Yes, right away."
"Foul whisp'rings are abroad. Unnatural deeds To their deaf pillows will discharge their secrets. More needs she the divine than the physician. God, God forgive us all! Look after her, Remove from her the means of all annoyance, My mind she has mated, and amazed my sight. I think, but dare not speak.","Evil rumors are going around. Unnatural acts will cause supernatural Sleepwalking and sleeptalking were considered supernatural events in Shakespeares time. supernatural things to happen. People with guilty and deranged minds will confess their secrets to their pillows as they sleep. This woman needs a priest more than a doctor. God forgive us all! (to the waiting- GENTLEWOMAN) Look after her. Remove anything she might hurt herself with. Watch her constantly. And now, good-night. She has bewildered my mind and amazed my eyes. I have an opinion, but I don’t dare to say it out loud."
"Good night, good doctor.","Good night, good doctor."
"The English power is near, led on by Malcolm, His uncle Siward and the good Macduff. Revenges burn in them, for their dear causes Would to the bleeding and the grim alarm","The English army is near, led by Malcolm, his uncle Siward, and the good Macduff. They burn for revenge. The wrongs they have suffered would make dead men rise up and fight."
Near Birnam Wood Shall we well meet them; that way are they coming.,We’ll meet them near Birnam Wood. They are coming that way.
Who knows if Donalbain be with his brother?,Does anyone know if Donalbain is with his brother?
"For certain, sir, he is not. I have a file Of all the gentry. There is Siward’s son, Protest their first of manhood.","He is definitely not there, sir. I have a list of all the important men. Siward’s son is there, as well as many boys too young to have beards who will become men by joining in this battle."
What does the tyrant?,What is the tyrant Macbeth doing?
"Great Dunsinane he strongly fortifies. Some say he’s mad, others that lesser hate him Do call it valiant fury. But, for certain, Within the belt of rule.",He is fortifying his castle at Dunsinane with heavy defenses. Some say he’s insane. Those who hate him less call it brave anger. One thing is certain: he’s out of control.
"Now does he feel His secret murders sticking on his hands. Now minutely revolts upbraid his faith-breach. Those he commands move only in command, Hang loose about him, like a giant’s robe Upon a dwarfish thief.","Now Macbeth feels the blood of his murdered enemies sticking to his hands. Now, rebel armies punish him every minute for his treachery. The soldiers he commands are only following orders. They don’t fight because they love Macbeth. Now he seems too small to be a great king, like a midget trying to wear the robes of a giant."
"Who then shall blame His pestered senses to recoil and start, When all that is within him does condemn","Who can blame him for acting crazy, when inside he condemns himself for everything he’s done?"
"Well, march we on, To give obedience where ’tis truly owed. Meet we the medicine of the sickly weal, And with him pour we in our country’s purge Each drop of us.","Well, let’s keep marching and give our loyalty to someone who truly deserves it. We’re going to meet Malcolm, the doctor who will cure our sick country. We’ll pour out our own blood to help him."
"Or so much as it needs, Make we our march towards Birnam.",However much blood we need to give to water the royal flower and drown the weeds—to make Malcolm king and get rid of Macbeth. Let’s proceed on our march to Birnam.
"Bring me no more reports. Let them fly all. Till Birnam Wood remove to Dunsinane I cannot taint with fear. What’s the boy Malcolm? Was he not born of woman? The spirits that know “Fear not, Macbeth. No man that’s born of woman Shall e'er have power upon thee.” Then fly, false thanes, And mingle with the English epicures. The mind I sway by and the heart I bear","Don’t bring me any more reports. I don’t care if all the thanes desert me. Until Birnam Wood gets up and moves to Dunsinane, I won’t be affected by fear. What’s the boy Malcolm? Wasn’t he born from a woman? The spirits that know the future have told me this: “Don’t be afraid, Macbeth. No man born from a woman will ever defeat you.” So get out of here, disloyal thanes, and join the weak and decadent English! My mind and courage will never falter with doubt or shake with fear."
"The devil damn thee black, thou cream-faced loon! Where got’st thou that goose look?","May the devil turn you black, you white-faced fool! Why do you look like a frightened goose?"
There is ten thousand—,There are ten thousand—
"Geese, villain?","Geese, you idiot?"
"Soldiers, sir.","Soldiers, sir."
"Go, prick thy face and over-red thy fear, Thou lily-livered boy. What soldiers, patch? Death of thy soul! Those linen cheeks of thine Are counselors to fear. What soldiers, whey-face?","Go pinch your cheeks and bring some color back into your face, you cowardly boy. What soldiers, fool? Curse you! That pale face of yours will frighten the others as well. What soldiers, milk-face?"
"The English force, so please you.","The English army, sir."
Take thy face hence.,Get out of my sight.
"Seyton!—I am sick at heart, When I behold—Seyton, I say!—This push Will cheer me ever, or disseat me now. I have lived long enough. My way of life And that which should accompany old age, As honor, love, obedience, troops of friends, I must not look to have, but, in their stead, Curses, not loud but deep, mouth-honor, breath Seyton!","Seyton!—I’m sick at heart when I see—Seyton, come here!—This battle will either secure my reign forever or else topple me from the throne. I have lived long enough. The course of my life is beginning to wither and fall away, like a yellowing leaf in autumn. The things that should go along with old age, like honor, love, obedience, and loyal friends, I cannot hope to have. Instead, I have passionate but quietly whispered curses, people who honor me with their words but not in their hearts, and lingering life, which my heart would gladly end, though I can’t bring myself to do it. Seyton!"
What’s your gracious pleasure?,What do you want?
What news more?,Is there more news?
"All is confirmed, my lord, which was reported.",All the rumors have been confirmed.
I’ll fight till from my bones my flesh be hacked. Give me my armor.,I’ll fight until they hack the flesh off my bones. Give me my armor.
'Tis not needed yet.,You don’t need it yet.
"I’ll put it on. Send out more horses. Skirr the country round. Hang those that talk of fear. Give me mine armor. How does your patient, doctor?","I’ll put it on anyway. Send out more cavalry. Scour the whole country and hang anyone spreading fear. Give me my armor. (to the DOCTOR) How is my wife, doctor?"
"Not so sick, my lord, That keep her from her rest.","She is not sick, my lord, but she is troubled with endless visions that keep her from sleeping."
"Cure her of that. Canst thou not minister to a mind diseased, Pluck from the memory a rooted sorrow, Raze out the written troubles of the brain Cleanse the stuffed bosom of that perilous stuff Which weighs upon the heart?",Cure her of that. Can’t you treat a diseased mind? Take away her memory of sorrow? Use some drug to erase the troubling thoughts from her brain and ease her heart?
Therein the patient Must minister to himself.,"For that kind of relief, the patient must heal herself."
"Throw physic to the dogs; I’ll none of it. Seyton, send out.—Doctor, the thanes fly from me. Come, sir, dispatch.—If thou couldst, doctor, cast The water of my land, find her disease, And purge it to a sound and pristine health, That should applaud again.—Pull ’t off, I say.— What rhubarb, senna, or what purgative drug, Would scour these English hence? Hear’st thou of them?","Medicine is for the dogs. I won’t have anything to do with it. (to SEYTON) Come, put my armor on me. Give me my lance. Seyton, send out the soldiers. (to the DOCTOR) Doctor, the thanes are running away from me. (to SEYTON) Come on, sir, hurry. (to the DOCTOR) Can you figure out what’s wrong with my country? If you can diagnose its disease by examining its urine, and bring it back to health, I will praise you to the ends of the Earth, where the sound will echo back so you can hear the applause again.—(to SEYTON) Pull it off, I tell you. (to the DOCTOR) What drug would purge the English from this country? Have you heard of any?"
"Ay, my good lord. Your royal preparation","Yes, my good lord. Your preparation for war sounds like something."
"Bring it after me. I will not be afraid of death and bane, Till Birnam Forest come to Dunsinane.",(to SEYTON) Bring the armor and follow me. I will not be afraid of death and destruction until Birnam forest picks itself up and moves to Dunsinane.
"(aside) Were I from Dunsinane away and clear, Profit again should hardly draw me here.",(to himself) I wish I were far away from Dunsinane. You couldn’t pay me to come back here.
"Cousins, I hope the days are near at hand That chambers will be safe.","Kinsmen, I hope the time is coming when people will be safe in their own bedrooms."
We doubt it nothing.,We don’t doubt it.
What wood is this before us?,What’s the name of this forest behind us?
The wood of Birnam.,Birnam Wood.
Let every soldier hew him down a bough The numbers of our host and make discovery Err in report of us.,"Tell every soldier to break off a branch and hold it in front of him. That way we can conceal how many of us there are, and Macbeth’s spies will give him inaccurate reports."
It shall be done.,We’ll do it.
We learn no other but the confident tyrant Keeps still in Dunsinane and will endure,We have no news except that the overconfident Macbeth is still in Dunsinane and will allow us to lay siege to the castle.
"'Tis his main hope: For, where there is advantage to be given, Both more and less have given him the revolt, And none serve with him but constrainèd things Whose hearts are absent too.","He wants us to lay siege. Wherever his soldiers have an opportunity to leave him, they do, whatever rank they are. No one fights with him except men who are forced to, and their hearts aren’t in it."
Let our just censures Industrious soldiership.,We shouldn’t make any judgments until we achieve our goal. Let’s go fight like hardworking soldiers.
"The time approaches That will with due decision make us know What we shall say we have and what we owe. Thoughts speculative their unsure hopes relate, Towards which, advance the war.","Soon we’ll find out what’s really ours and what isn’t. It’s easy for us to get our hopes up just sitting around thinking about it, but the only way this is really going to be settled is by violence. So let’s move our armies forward."
"Hang out our banners on the outward walls. The cry is still “They come!” Our castle’s strength Will laugh a siege to scorn. Here let them lie Till famine and the ague eat them up. We might have met them dareful, beard to beard, And beat them backward home.","Hang our flags on the outer walls. Everyone keeps yelling, “Here they come!” Our castle is strong enough to laugh off their seige. They can sit out there until they die of hunger and disease. If it weren’t for the fact that so many of our soldiers revolted and joined them, we could have met them out in front of the castle, man to man, and beaten them back to England."
What is that noise?,What’s that noise?
"It is the cry of women, my good lord.","It’s women crying, my good lord."
"I have almost forgot the taste of fears. To hear a night-shriek, and my fell of hair Would at a dismal treatise rouse and stir As life were in ’t. I have supped full with horrors. Direness, familiar to my slaughterous thoughts","I’ve almost forgotten what fear feels like. There was a time when I would have been terrified by a shriek in the night, and the hair on my skin would have stood up when I heard a ghost story. But now I’ve had my fill of real horrors. Horrible things are so familiar that they can’t startle me."
Wherefore was that cry?,What was that cry for?
"The queen, my lord, is dead.","The queen is dead, my lord."
"She should have died hereafter. There would have been a time for such a word. Tomorrow, and tomorrow, and tomorrow, To the last syllable of recorded time, And all our yesterdays have lighted fools The way to dusty death. Out, out, brief candle! Life’s but a walking shadow, a poor player And then is heard no more. It is a tale Told by an idiot, full of sound and fury, Signifying nothing.","She would have died later anyway. That news was bound to come someday. Tomorrow, and tomorrow, and tomorrow. The days creep slowly along until the end of time. And every day that’s already happened has taken fools that much closer to their deaths. Out, out, brief candle. Life is nothing more than an illusion. It’s like a poor actor who struts and worries for his hour on the stage and then is never heard from again. Life is a story told by an idiot, full of noise and emotional disturbance but devoid of meaning."
Thou comest to use Thy tongue; thy story quickly.,You’ve come to tell me something. Tell me quickly.
"Gracious my lord, But know not how to do ’t.","My gracious lord, I should tell you what I saw, but I don’t know how to say it."
"Well, say, sir.",Just say it.
"As I did stand my watch upon the hill, I looked toward Birnam, and anon methought The wood began to move.","As I was standing watch on the hill, I looked toward Birnam, and I thought I saw the forest begin to move."
Liar and slave!,Liar and slave!
"Within this three mile may you see it coming; I say, a moving grove.","Punish me if it’s not true. Three miles from here you can see it coming, a moving forest."
"If thou speak’st false, Upon the next tree shall thou hang alive Till famine cling thee. If thy speech be sooth, I pull in resolution and begin To doubt th' equivocation of the fiend That lies like truth. “Fear not, till Birnam wood Do come to Dunsinane”; and now a wood If this which he avouches does appear, There is nor flying hence nor tarrying here. I 'gin to be aweary of the sun, And wish th' estate o' th' world were now undone.— At least we’ll die with harness on our back.","If you’re lying, I’ll hang you alive from the nearest tree until you die of hunger. If what you say is true, you can do the same to me. (to himself) My confidence is failing. I’m starting to doubt the lies the devil told me, which sounded like truth. “Don’t worry until Birnam Wood comes to Dunsinane.” And now a wood is coming to Dunsinane. Prepare for battle, and go! If what this messenger says is true, it’s no use running away or staying here. I’m starting to grow tired of living, and I’d like to see the world plunged into chaos. Ring the alarms! Blow, wind! Come, ruin! At least we’ll die with our armor on."
"Now near enough. Your leafy screens throw down, And show like those you are.—You, worthy uncle, Shall, with my cousin, your right-noble son, Lead our first battle. Worthy Macduff and we According to our order.","We’re close enough now. Throw down these branches and show them who you really are. Uncle Siward, you and your son will lead the first battle. Brave Macduff and I will do the rest, according to our battle plan."
"Fare you well. Do we but find the tyrant’s power tonight, Let us be beaten if we cannot fight.","Good luck. If we meet Macbeth’s army tonight, let us be beaten if we cannot fight."
Those clamorous harbingers of blood and death.,Blow all the trumpets. They loudly announce the news of blood and death.
"They have tied me to a stake. I cannot fly, But, bearlike, I must fight the course. What’s he That was not born of woman? Such a one Am I to fear, or none.","They have me tied to a stake. I can’t run away. I have to stand and fight, like a bear In Shakespeare’s time, bears were tied to stakes and attacked by dogs for the amusement of audiences. bear .Where’s the man who wasn’t born from a woman? He’s the only one I’m afraid of, nobody else."
What is thy name?,What’s your name?
Thou 'lt be afraid to hear it.,You’ll be afraid to hear it.
"No, though thou call’st thyself a hotter name Than any is in hell.","No I won’t, even if you were one of the worst demons in hell."
My name’s Macbeth.,My name’s Macbeth.
More hateful to mine ear.,The devil himself couldn’t say a name I hate more.
"No, nor more fearful.","No, nor could the devil’s name be more frightening."
"Thou liest, abhorrèd tyrant. With my sword I’ll prove the lie thou speak’st.","You lie, you disgusting tyrant. I’ll prove with my sword that I’m not scared of you."
"Thou wast born of woman. But swords I smile at, weapons laugh to scorn,",You were born from a woman. Swords don’t frighten me. I laugh at any weapon used by a man who was born from a woman.
"That way the noise is. Tyrant, show thy face! If thou beest slain, and with no stroke of mine, My wife and children’s ghosts will haunt me still. I cannot strike at wretched kerns, whose arms Or else my sword with an unbattered edge I sheathe again undeeded. There thou shouldst be; By this great clatter, one of the greatest note Seems bruited. Let me find him, Fortune,","The noise is coming from over there. Tyrant, show your face! If someone other than me kills you, the ghosts of my wife and children will haunt me forever. I can’t be bothered to fight these lame soldiers who only fight for money. I’ll either fight you, Macbeth, or else I’ll put down my sword unused. You must be over there. By the great noise, it sounds like one of the highest-ranking men is being announced. I hope I find him! I ask for nothing more than that."
"This way, my lord. The castle’s gently rendered. The tyrant’s people on both sides do fight, The noble thanes do bravely in the war, The day almost itself professes yours,","Come this way, my lord. The castle has been surrendered without a fight. Macbeth’s soldiers are fighting on both sides. Our noblemen are battling bravely. The victory is almost yours, and it seems like there’s not much left to do."
We have met with foes That strike beside us.,Our enemies fight as if they’re trying not to hurt us.
"Enter, sir, the castle.","Sir, enter the castle."
"Why should I play the Roman fool and die On mine own sword? Whiles I see lives, the gashes Do better upon them.","Why should I commit suicide like one of the ancient Romans? As long as I see enemies of mine alive, I would rather see my sword wound them than me."
"Turn, hellhound, turn!","Turn around, you dog from hell, turn around!"
Of all men else I have avoided thee. With blood of thine already.,You are the only man I have avoided. But go away now. I’m already guilty of killing your whole family.
I have no words. My voice is in my sword. Thou bloodier villain Than terms can give thee out!,I have nothing to say to you. My sword will talk for me. You are too evil for words!
"Thou losest labor. As easy mayst thou the intrenchant air Let fall thy blade on vulnerable crests; I bear a charmèd life, which must not yield To one of woman born.","You’re wasting your time trying to wound me. You might as well try to stab the air with your sword. Go fight someone who can be harmed. I lead a charmed life, which can’t be ended by anyone born from a woman."
"Despair thy charm, And let the angel whom thou still hast served Untimely ripped.",You can forget about your charm. The evil spirit you serve can tell you that I was not born. They cut me out of my mother’s womb before she could bear me naturally.
"Accursèd be that tongue that tells me so, For it hath cowed my better part of man! And be these juggling fiends no more believed, That keep the word of promise to our ear, And break it to our hope. I’ll not fight with thee.","Curse you for telling me this. You’ve fightened away my courage. I don’t believe those evil creatures anymore. They tricked me with their wordgames, raising my hopes and then destroying them. I won’t fight you."
"Then yield thee, coward, And live to be the show and gaze o' th' time. Painted on a pole, and underwrit, “Here may you see the tyrant.”","Then surrender, coward, and we’ll put you in a freakshow, just like they do with deformed animals. We’ll put a picture of you on a sign, right above the words “Come see the tyrant!”"
"I will not yield, To kiss the ground before young Malcolm’s feet, And to be baited with the rabble’s curse. And thou opposed, being of no woman born, Yet I will try the last. Before my body I throw my warlike shield. Lay on, Macduff, And damned be him that first cries, “Hold, enough!”","I’m not going to surrender and have to kiss the ground in front of Malcolm, or be taunted by the common people. Even though Birnam Wood really did come to Dunsinane, and I’m fighting a man not of woman born, I’ll fight to the end. I’ll put up my shield and battle you. Come on, let’s go at it, Macduff, and damn the first man who cries, 'Stop! Enough!'"
I would the friends we miss were safe arrived.,I wish all of our friends could have survived this battle.
"Some must go off. And yet, by these I see, So great a day as this is cheaply bought.","In every battle, some people will always be killed, but judging from the men I see around us, our great victory didn’t cost us very much."
"Macduff is missing, and your noble son.","Macduff is missing, and so is your noble son."
"Your son, my lord, has paid a soldier’s debt. The which no sooner had his prowess confirmed In the unshrinking station where he fought, But like a man he died.","My lord, your son has paid the soldier’s price: death. He only lived long enough to become a man, and as soon as he proved that he was a man by fighting like one, he died."
Then he is dead?,So he’s dead?
"Ay, and brought off the field. Your cause of sorrow It hath no end.","Yes, and he’s been carried off the field. Your grief should not be equal to his worth, because then your sorrow would never end."
Had he his hurts before?,Were his wounds on his front side?
"Ay, on the front.","Yes, on his front."
"Why then, God’s soldier be he! Had I as many sons as I have hairs, I would not wish them to a fairer death.","Well then, he’s God’s soldier now! If I had as many sons as I have hairs on my head, I couldn’t hope that any of them would die more honorably than he did. And that’s all there is to it."
"He’s worth more sorrow, And that I’ll spend for him.","He is worth more mourning than that, and I will mourn for him."
"He’s worth no more. They say he parted well and paid his score. And so, God be with him! Here comes newer comfort.","He is worth no more than that. They tell me he died well, and settled his scores. With that, I hope God is with him! Here comes better news."
"Hail, king! For so thou art. Behold where stands I see thee compassed with thy kingdom’s pearl, That speak my salutation in their minds, Whose voices I desire aloud with mine. Hail, King of Scotland!","Hail, king! Because that’s what you are now. Look, here I have Macbeth’s cursed head. We are free from his tyranny. I see that you have the kingdom’s noblemen around you, and they’re thinking the same thing as me. I want them to join me in this loud cheer, Hail, King of Scotland!"
"Hail, King of Scotland!","Hail, King of Scotland!"
"We shall not spend a large expense of time Before we reckon with your several loves And make us even with you. My thanes and kinsmen, Henceforth be earls, the first that ever Scotland Which would be planted newly with the time, As calling home our exiled friends abroad That fled the snares of watchful tyranny, Producing forth the cruel ministers Who, as ’tis thought, by self and violent hands Took off her life; this, and what needful else That calls upon us, by the grace of Grace, We will perform in measure, time, and place. Whom we invite to see us crowned at Scone.","It won’t be long before I reward each of you as he deserves. My thanes and kinsmen, I name you all earls, the first earls that Scotland has ever had. We have a lot to do at the dawn of this new era. We must call home all of our exiled friends who fled from the grip of Macbeth’s tyranny, and we must bring to justice all the evil ministers of this dead butcher and his demon-like queen, who, rumor has it, committed suicide. This, and whatever else we are called to do by God, we will do at the right time and in the right place. So I thank you all, and I invite each and every one of you to come watch me be crowned king of Scotland at Scone."
