Escalus.,Escalus.
My lord.,"Yes, my lord?"
"Of government the properties to unfold, Would seem in me to affect speech and discourse; Exceeds, in that, the lists of all advice My strength can give you: then no more remains, But that to your sufficiency as your Worth is able, And let them work. The nature of our people, For common justice, you’re as pregnant in As art and practise hath enriched any That we remember. There is our commission, From which we would not have you warp. Call hither,","Explaining government affairs always makes me talk excitedly. But since you know more about matters of government than I can ever tell you, the only thing left for me to say is this: rely on your natural ability, and let it work with your knowledge. You know as much, from both learning and experience, about the nature of our people, our city’s laws and procedures, and our legal system as anyone I can think of. Here are your written orders; do not deviate from them. [To Attendants.] Go and order Angelo to come to me."
"What figure of us think you he will bear? For you must know, we have with special soul Elected him our absence to supply, Lent him our terror, dress’d him with our love, Of our own power: what think you of it?","How do you think he’ll represent me? For you must know, after careful consideration, I’ve chosen him to rule in my absence, deputizing him with the dread and love my presence inspires, and transferring to him all the tools in my power. What do you think?"
"If any in Vienna be of worth To undergo such ample grace and honour, It is Lord Angelo.","If anyone in Vienna deserves such an honor, it’s Lord Angelo."
Look where he comes.,Here he comes.
"Always obedient to your grace’s will, I come to know your pleasure.","Here I am, obedient as always; what can I do for you?"
"Angelo, There is a kind of character in thy life, Fully unfold. Thyself and thy belongings Are not thine own so proper as to waste Thyself upon thy virtues, they on thee. Heaven doth with us as we with torches do, Did not go forth of us, ’twere all alike As if we had them not. Spirits are not finely touch’d But to fine issues, nor Nature never lends The smallest scruple of her excellence Herself the glory of a creditor, Both thanks and use. But I do bend my speech To one that can my part in him advertise; Hold therefore, Angelo This has several potential meanings. Either “Stand firm,” or Angelo could be starting to protest (as he does later on) and Duke Vincentio could be saying, “Stop, don’t interrupt me.” It could also mean “Here, take this,”as the Duke hands Angelo his commission, or tries to. Hold therefore, Angelo :— Mortality and mercy in Vienna Live in thy tongue and heart: old Escalus, Though first in question, is thy secondary. Take thy commission.","Angelo, there is a distinctive pattern to your life that tells people what sort of man you are. But your talents don’t belong to you alone, and you mustn’t waste them by keeping them to yourself. Heaven uses us the way we use a torch—not to shine for itself, but to shed light onto the world. If we don't use our talents in the world, it would be the same as if we didn't have those talents at all. People are given certain natures to accomplish certain things. Mother Nature doesn’t lend you even a smidgen of talent without expecting you to pay her back—with interest and gratitude. But here I am talking to someone who could instruct me! So, stand firm, Angelo—in my absence, you’ll stand in for me completely. Vienna’s criminals will be executed or pardoned based on what you feel and say. Although old Escalus is senior to you, he’ll be your second-in-command. Take your written orders."
"Let there be some more test made of my metal, Before so noble and so great a figure Be stamp’d upon it.","My good lord, please test me further before you raise me to such a high, prominent position."
"No more evasion: Proceeded to you; therefore take your honours. Our haste from hence is of so quick condition That it prefers itself and leaves unquestion’d Matters of needful value. We shall write to you, How it goes with us, and do look to know What doth befall you here. So, fare you well; To the hopeful execution do I leave you Of your commissions.","No more procrastinating. I’ve chosen you after careful consideration, so accept the honor. It’s imperative that I leave now, even if it means leaving some important matters undiscussed. I’ll write to you when I have the time and feel the need, telling you how I am, and I’ll expect to hear how you’re doing. So, goodbye; I’ll leave you to carry out your orders—successfully, no doubt."
That we may bring you something on the way.,"My lord, will you allow us to escort you part of the way?"
"My haste may not admit it; Nor need you, on mine honour, have to do With any scruple; your scope is as mine own As to your soul seems good. Give me your hand: I’ll privily away. I love the people, But do not like to stage me to their eyes: Through it do well, I do not relish well Nor do I think the man of safe discretion That does affect it. Once more, fare you well.","Sorry, I’m in too big a rush. But please don’t have any doubts—you have all my authority to enforce or change the laws in any way that seems good to you. Let’s shake hands, and I’ll sneak off. I love the people but don’t like to parade before them. I don’t like their loud applause and emphatic cheering, though they can be politically useful; nor do I trust the judgment of any man who does desire such cheers and applause. Once again, goodbye."
The heavens give safety to your purposes!,May heaven grant you a safe trip!
Lead forth and bring you back in happiness!,"A happy departure, and a happy homecoming as well!"
I thank you. Fare you well.,Thank you. Goodbye.
"I shall desire you, sir, to give me leave To have free speech with you; and it concerns me To look into the bottom of my place: A power I have, but of what strength and nature","Sir, I’d like to have a frank talk with you because I want to figure out the exact nature of my new job. I know I’ve got some authority, but how much, and what kind, I’m not clear on."
"’Tis so with me. Let us withdraw together, And we may soon our satisfaction have Touching that point.",Same with me. Let’s leave together and we'll go figure it out.
I’ll wait upon your honour.,I’ll accompany you.
"If the duke with the other dukes come not to composition with the King of Hungary, why then all the dukes fall upon the king.","If our Duke, along with the other Dukes, can’t reach an agreement with the King of Hungary, they’re all going to attack him."
"Heaven grant us its peace, but not the King of",May God give us peace—except not with Hungary.
Amen.,Amen.
"Thou concludest like the sanctimonious pirate, that went to sea with the Ten Commandments, but scraped one out of the table.",You talk like the self-righteous pirate who went to sea with the Ten Commandments but cut out one of the commandments.
‘Thou shalt not steal’?,Was it “Thou shalt not steal”?
"Ay, that he razed.","Yep, that’s the one."
"Why, ’twas a commandment to command the captain and all the rest from their functions: they put forth to steal. There’s not a soldier of us all, that, in well that prays for peace.","Right, because that commandment would’ve put the captain and his pirate crew out of business—they went to sea to steal. When grace is being said before a meal, there’s not a soldier among us who likes a prayer for peace."
I never heard any soldier dislike it.,I never heard any soldier say he dislikes it.
I believe thee; for I think thou never wast where grace was said.,I believe you—I don’t think you’ve ever been at a table where they said grace.
No? a dozen times at least.,No? I’ve heard it a dozen times at least.
"What, in metre?","What, in verse?"
In any proportion or in any language.,In any form or in any language.
"I think, or in any religion.",Or in any religion.
"Ay, why not? Grace is grace, despite of all wicked villain, despite of all grace.","Well, why not? Grace is grace, no matter what your religious beliefs are, just like you’re a scoundrel, no matter how much grace you have."
"Well, there went but a pair of shears between us.","Hey, you and me are cut from the same cloth."
I grant; as there may between the lists and the velvet. Thou art the list.,Right—the way a piece of velvet and the scrap ends are from the same cloth. You’re the scrap.
"a three-piled piece, I warrant thee: I had as lief be a list of an English kersey as be piled, as thou art piled, for a French velvet. Do I speak feelingly now?","And you’re the velvet: a nice, thick piece of piled velvet. I swear, I’d rather be a piece of plain, English cloth than be like you, a French velvet that’s full of piles Shakespeare plays on the word “piles” here. Piled velvet was plush, but “piles” refers also to the STD syphilis, commonly called the French disease. Syphilis leaves sores that at the time were often covered with velvet patches. piles and STDs. Got you there, didn’t I?"
"feeling of thy speech: I will, out of thine own confession, learn to begin thy health; but, whilst I live, forget to drink after thee.","I think you did, and from the painful way you talk, I think something’s got you down there. I’d be glad to toast your health; just remind me never to drink from your glass after you."
"I think I have done myself wrong, have I not?","I guess I set myself up, didn’t I?"
"Yes, that thou hast, whether thou art tainted or free.","Yeah, you did, whether you’ve got something or not."
"Behold, behold, where Madam Mitigation comes! I have purchased as many diseases under her roof as come to—","Oh, look, here comes Madam Satisfaction. The number of venereal diseases I’ve caught under her roof comes to—"
"To what, I pray?",To what?
Judge.,Guess.
"To three thousand dolours “dolours”: A pun, meaning both the French word for “sadnesses” and “dollars.” dolours a year.",Three thousand dollars’ worth.
"Ay, and more.","Yeah, and more."
"A French crown A pun. A French crown is both a coin and a reference to a bald head, which often resulted from treatment for syphilis (“the French disease”). A French crown more.",A syphilis sore more.
Thou art always figuring diseases in me; but thou art full of error; I am sound.,"You’re always suggesting I’m diseased, but you’re wrong. I’m sound and healthy."
things that are hollow: thy bones are hollow; impiety has made a feast of thee.,"You may be sound, but you’re not healthy. Your bones sound hollow. Loose living has eaten out your insides."
How now! which of your hips has the most profound sciatica?,"Hey, there! In which hip is the pain of your sciatica worse?"
"Well, well; there’s one yonder arrested and carried","Well, well. There’s someone over there who’s been arrested and hauled off to prison who was worth five thousand of you all."
"Who’s that, I pray thee?",Who’s that?
"Marry, sir, that’s Claudio, Signior Claudio.","That’s Claudio, Signior Claudio."
Claudio to prison? ’tis not so.,Claudio in prison? It can’t be true.
"Nay, but I know ’tis so: I saw him arrested, saw three days his head to be chopped off.","I know it's true: I saw him arrested and saw him carried away, and what’s more, they’re chopping his head off in three days."
"But, after all this fooling, I would not have it so. Art thou sure of this?","All kidding aside, I’d hate for this to be true. Are you sure?"
I am too sure of it: and it is for getting Madam,I’m all too sure. It’s for getting Miss Julietta pregnant.
"Believe me, this may be: he promised to meet me two hours since, and he was ever precise in promise-keeping.","She might be right about this. He promised to meet me two hours ago, and he always keeps his promises."
"Besides, you know, it draws something near to the","You know, this is exactly the sort of thing we were just talking about."
"But, most of all, agreeing with the proclamation.",Most of all it fits with the public proclamation that was made.
Away! let’s go learn the truth of it.,Let’s go see if we can get to the bottom of this.
"Thus, what with the war, what with the sweat “the sweat” could mean the plague of sweating sickness, or it could refer to “the sweating tub,” a kind of hot tub treatment for STDs. the sweat , what with the gallows and what with poverty, I am","What with the war, plague, executions, and general poverty, I’m losing business."
How now! what’s the news with you?,Hi! what’s new with you?
Yonder man is carried to prison.,That man over there is being hauled off to prison.
Well; what has he done?,What did he do?
A woman.,A woman.
But what’s his offence?,But what’s his crime?
Groping for trouts in a peculiar river.,Fishing in the “private part” of a river.
"What, is there a maid with child by him?","What, a virgin is pregnant because of him?"
"No, but there’s a woman with maid by him. You have not heard of the proclamation, have you?","No, but a woman’s having a child because of him. You haven’t heard about the proclamation, have you?"
"What proclamation, man?","What proclamation, man?"
All houses in the suburbs of Vienna must be plucked down.,All the brothels in the suburbs of Vienna must be torn down.
And what shall become of those in the city?,And what about those in the city?
"They shall stand for seed: they had gone down too, but that a wise burgher put in for them.","They’ll be left standing. They would’ve been destroyed, too, but a savvy businessman bought them."
pulled down?,But all our brothels in the suburbs are going to be demolished?
"To the ground, mistress.","Down to the ground, ma’am."
"Why, here’s a change indeed in the commonwealth! What shall become of me?","Wow, that's a change for the country. What’s going to happen to me?"
"clients: though you change your place, you need not change your trade; I’ll be your tapster A tapster was a bartender. tapster still. Courage! there will be pity taken on you: you that have worn your eyes almost out in the service, you","Come on, don’t worry. Good lawyers never lack for clients. Though you change locations, you don’t need to change professions. I’ll still be your pimp. Courage! They’ll take pity on you; all of you that have grown old and gray servicing people will be repaid."
"What’s to do here, Thomas Tapster? Let’s withdraw.","What’s all this fuss, Thomas Tapster? Let’s get out of here."
"Here comes Signior Claudio, led by the provost to prison; and there’s Madam Juliet.","Here comes Signior Claudio, led to prison by the provost. And there's Miss Juliet."
"Fellow, why dost thou show me thus to the world?","Man, why are you parading me like this in front of everyone? Take me off to prison already."
"I do it not in evil disposition, But from Lord Angelo by special charge.",I’m not being cruel. It’s Lord Angelo’s special order.
"Thus can the demigod Authority A Biblical reference, specifically Romans : “Therefore hath he mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he hardeneth.” Thus can the demigod Authority Make us pay down for our offence by weight A Biblical reference, specifically Romans : “Therefore hath he mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he hardeneth.” Make us pay down for our offence by weight On whom it will not, so A Biblical reference, specifically Romans : “Therefore hath he mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he hardeneth.” On whom it will not, so ; yet still ’tis just.","This is how the authorities, like gods, make us pay for our crimes. As the Bible says, God has mercy on those he chooses to have mercy on, and doesn’t have mercy on those he chooses not to, and so on. I suppose that’s fair."
"Why, how now, Claudio! Whence comes this restraint?",Claudio! Why are you being arrested?
"From too much liberty, my Lucio, liberty: As surfeit is the father of much fast, Turns to restraint. Our natures do pursue, Like rats that ravin down their proper bane, A thirsty evil; and when we drink we die.","For being too promiscuous, Lucio, too promiscuous. The same way overeating leads to fasting, and overdoing anything leads to being restricted. Like rats gobbling up rat poison, we have a thirst for harmful things, and when we drink them we die."
"If I could speak so wisely under an arrest, I would the truth, I had as lief have the foppery of freedom as the morality of imprisonment. What’s thy offence, Claudio?","If I could speak so well while under arrest, I’d ask a few creditors I know to come and lock me up. Though frankly, I’d rather be foolish and free than wise and a prisoner. What’s your crime, Claudio?"
What but to speak of would offend again.,To speak of it would be another crime.
"What, is’t murder?","What, is it murder?"
No.,No.
Lechery?,Lechery?
Call it so.,You could call it that.
"Away, sir, you must go.","Sir, you have to go."
"One word, good friend. Lucio, a word with you.","(to the Provost) Just a minute, good friend. Lucio, let me have a word with you."
"A hundred, if they’ll do you any good. Is lechery so look’d after?","A hundred, if they’ll do you any good. Is lechery regulated now?"
"Thus stands it with me: upon a true contract I got possession of Julietta’s bed: Save that we do the denunciation lack Of outward order: this we came not to, Only for propagation of a dower Remaining in the coffer of her friends, Till time had made them for us. But it chances The stealth of our most mutual entertainment With character too gross is writ on Juliet.","Here’s what happened: I slept with Julietta after we got engaged. You know her—she’s practically my wife, except that we haven’t had an official ceremony. The only reason we didn’t was to increase the amount of the dowry she might receive from her friends and relatives. We thought we’d hide our love until we had a chance to win them over. But it turned out our secret intimacy had an all-too-obvious effect on Juliet."
"With child, perhaps?","Pregnant, huh?"
"And the new deputy now for the duke— Whether it be the fault and glimpse of newness, Or whether that the body public be A horse whereon the governor doth ride, He can command, lets it straight feel the spur; Whether the tyranny be in his place, Or in his emmence that fills it up, I stagger in:—but this new governor Which have, like unscour’d armour, hung by the wall So long that nineteen zodiacs have gone round And none of them been worn; and, for a name, Now puts the drowsy and neglected act","Unfortunately, yes. And this new deputy of the duke’s—I can’t say whether he’s been blinded by his new power or if he sees the public like a horse to be broken in, so he digs his spurs in right away to show it who’s boss; or if he’s just a bully; or if being a bully is part of the job. But this new governor is taking all these old penalties that, like rusty armor hanging on the wall, haven’t been used in years and is applying them to me. He’s imposing all these unenforced, long-ignored laws on me to make a name for himself. That has to be it, to make his name."
"I warrant it is: and thy head stands so tickle on thy shoulders that a milkmaid, if she be in love, may sigh it off. Send after the duke and appeal to him.",I bet it is; and your head sits so precariously on your shoulders right now that the sigh of a lovesick milkmaid could knock it off. Get in touch with the duke and appeal to him.
"I prithee, Lucio, do me this kind service: This day my sister should the cloister enter And there receive her approbation: Acquaint her with the danger of my state: To the strict deputy; bid herself assay him: I have great hope in that; for in her youth There is a prone and speechless dialect, Such as move men; beside, she hath prosperous art And well she can persuade.","I tried, but he can’t be found. Please, Lucio, do this favor for me: My sister’s entering a nunnery and starting her training period today. Tell her the danger I’m in, and implore her, in my name, to befriend this strict deputy and try to change his mind. I’ve got a lot of hope in her. Her youthful sweetness alone would move a man. Besides, she has a gift for rhetoric, and she can really persuade people."
"I pray she may; as well for the encouragement of the like, which else would stand under grievous imposition, as for the enjoying of thy life, who I game of tick-tack A board game in which pegs are inserted into holes—so, a game with a sexual connotation. game of tick-tack . I’ll to her.","I pray she can, for the lives of everyone like you who could now be punished, as well as for your own life, which I’d be sad to see lost so stupidly for playing with you. I’ll go to her."
"I thank you, good friend Lucio.","Thank you, Lucio. You’re a good friend."
Within two hours.,I’ll be there in two hours.
"Come, officer, away!","OK, officer, let’s go."
"No, holy father; throw away that thought; Believe not that the dribbling dart of love Can pierce a complete bosom. Why I desire thee To give me secret harbour, hath a purpose Of burning youth.","No, holy father, forget that idea. Don’t think that Cupid’s feeble arrow can pierce this invulnerable bosom. I want you to shelter me secretly for a reason more ageless and serious than any youthful, burning desire."
May your grace speak of it?,Can you talk about it?
"My holy sir, none better knows than you How I have ever loved the life removed Where youth, and cost, and witless bravery keeps. I have deliver’d to Lord Angelo, A man of stricture and firm abstinence, My absolute power and place here in Vienna, For so I have strew’d it in the common ear, And so it is received. Now, pious sir, You will demand of me why I do this?","Reverend sir, no one knows better than you how I’ve always loved the quiet life and never cared much for the social scene where young people brag and throw their money around. I’ve given Lord Angelo, a man of strict self-discipline and self-denial, my absolute power and position here in Vienna. He thinks I’ve gone to Poland, since I’ve spread that rumor among the general public, and everybody believes it. Now, religious sir, do you want to know why I did this?"
"Gladly, my lord.","Yes, my lord."
"The needful bits and curbs to headstrong weeds, Which for this nineteen years we have let slip; Even like an o’ergrown lion in a cave, That goes not out to prey. Now, as fond fathers, Only to stick it in their children’s sight For terror, not to use, in time the rod Becomes more mock’d than fear’d; so our decrees, Dead to infliction, to themselves are dead; The baby beats the nurse, and quite athwart Goes all decorum.","I instituted strict statutes and firm laws, necessary controls for headstrong human natures, but for nineteen years I’ve let them grow lax, like an old, fat lion that lies in his cave and never leaves to hunt. Now, a doting father can make a birch whipping rod and wave it in his children’s faces, but if he only threatens and never uses it, eventually they’ll laugh at it and not fear it. Similarly, our regulations have gone unenforced, and so they’re as good as dead. People are flouting the law with their loose living. The proper order of things is turned upside down, as if babies were spanking their nannies."
It rested in your grace To unloose this tied-up justice when you pleased: Than in Lord Angelo.,"It was in your lordship’s ability to get the justice system working again whenever you wanted. And it would’ve been taken more seriously if you’d done it, rather than Lord Angelo."
"I do fear, too dreadful: Sith ’twas my fault to give the people scope, ’Twould be my tyranny to strike and gall them When evil deeds have their permissive pass And not the punishment. Therefore indeed, my father, I have on Angelo imposed the office; Who may, in the ambush of my name, strike home, To do in slander. And to behold his sway, I will, as ’twere a brother of your order, Visit both prince and people: therefore, I prithee, Supply me with the habit and instruct me Like a true friar. More reasons for this action At our more leisure shall I render you; Only, this one: Lord Angelo is precise; Stands at a guard with envy; scarce confesses Is more to bread than stone A Biblical reference, specifically Matthew : “Or what man is there of you, whom if his son ask bread, will he give him a stone?” Is more to bread than stone : hence shall we see, If power change purpose, what our seemers be.","Too seriously, I’m afraid. Since it was my fault to give the people so much freedom, I’d seem like a real tyrant now to whip them for things I allowed them to do. We essentially tell people to misbehave when we give evil deeds a pass and don’t punish them. So, friar, I’ve given the job to Angelo. He can effectively deal with this, in my name—but since I’m not personally involved, I won’t look bad. To see how he rules, I’d like to visit him and the people disguised as one of your order’s monks. So please furnish me with a robe and teach me how to behave like a real friar. When there’s more time, I’ll give you additional reasons for my actions. For now, I’ll tell you this one: Lord Angelo is a puritanical man, constantly guarding himself against desire, the type who barely admits blood flows in his veins. So if power changes a person’s principles, we’ll see how he really is."
And have you nuns no farther privileges?,And so you nuns have no other privileges?
Are not these large enough?,Aren’t these enough?
"Yes, truly; I speak not as desiring more; But rather wishing a more strict restraint","Oh, yes. I didn’t mean I wanted more freedom. Actually, I wish there were even more restrictions on the Saint Claire sisterhood."
[Within] Ho! Peace be in this place!,(offstage) Hello! Peace to this place!
Who’s that which calls?,Who’s that?
"It is a man’s voice. Gentle Isabella, Turn you the key, and know his business of him; When you have vow’d, you must not speak with men But in the presence of the priore Then, if you speak, you must not show your face, Or, if you show your face, you must not speak.","It’s a man’s voice. Isabella, unlock the door and ask him what he wants. I can’t, but you can, since you haven’t taken your vows yet. Once you have, you’ll only be able to speak with men in the presence of the Mother Superior. Then, if you speak, you mustn’t show your face. Or if you show your face, you mustn’t speak. He’s calling again. Please answer him."
Peace and prosperity! Who is’t that calls,Peace and prosperity! Who’s there?
"Hail, virgin, if you be, as those cheek-roses Proclaim you are no less! Can you so stead me As bring me to the sight of Isabella, To her unhappy brother Claudio?","Well, hello, virgin—if you are one, as your rosy cheeks proclaim you to be. Can you help me to find Isabella, a novice here and the pretty sister to Claudio, her unlucky brother?"
"Why ‘her unhappy brother’? let me ask, The rather for I now must make you know I am that Isabella and his sister.","Why “her unlucky brother”? I ask, because I’m Isabella, his sister."
"Not to be weary with you, he’s in prison.","Your brother sends you his love, sweet, pretty one. To get right to the point, he’s in prison."
Woe me! for what?,How awful! For what?
"For that which, if myself might be his judge, He should receive his punishment in thanks:","For something which, if you ask me, he should be thanked rather than punished. He’s gotten his lover pregnant."
"Sir, make me not your story.","Sir, don’t make things up."
"It is true. I would not—though ’tis my familiar sin With maids to seem the lapwing and to jest, I hold you as a thing ensky’d and sainted. By your renouncement an immortal spirit, And to be talk’d with in sincerity, As with a saint.","It’s true. I admit, I often play the deceiver and joker with young virgins and say things I don’t mean. But because of your religious vocation, I see you as a heavenly, spiritual being, and someone to speak to with sincerely, as I would a saint."
You do blaspheme the good in mocking me.,You mock real saints by calling me one.
"Do not believe it. Fewness and truth, ’tis thus: Your brother and his lover have embraced: As those that feed grow full, as blossoming time That from the seedness the bare fallow brings Expresseth his full tilth and husbandry.","Don’t think that. In brief: your brother and his girl have slept together. And the same way your stomach gets full when you eat—and as a bare field, when you plant it, yields a rich harvest—her body shows the results of his plowing."
Some one with child by him? My cousin Juliet?,He’s made someone pregnant? My cousin Juliet?
Is she your cousin?,Is she your cousin?
Adoptedly; as school-maids change their names,"Unofficially, in the silly but sweet way schoolgirls swear to be sisters."
She it is.,She’s the one.
"O, let him marry her.","Oh, let him marry her."
"This is the point. The duke is very strangely gone from hence; In hand and hope of action: but we do learn By those that know the very nerves of state, His givings-out were of an infinite distance From his true-meant design. Upon his place, Governs Lord Angelo; a man whose blood Is very snow-broth; one who never feels The wanton stings and motions of the sense, But doth rebate and blunt his natural edge He—to give fear to use and liberty, Which have for long run by the hideous law, As mice by lions—hath pick’d out an act, Under whose heavy sense your brother’s life And follows close the rigour of the statute, To make him an example. All hope is gone, Unless you have the grace by your fair prayer To soften Angelo: and that’s my pith of business","Here’s the problem. The duke has mysteriously left town. He deluded many men—myself included—with the hope of some military action. But now we hear from government insiders that his publicly announced reasons for leaving were far from his real plans. In his place, and with his full authority, Lord Angelo rules. This is a man whose blood is like melted snow, never warmed by uncontrolled lust, but who represses and dulls his natural appetites with exercises for the mind—studying and fasting. To scare folks who are habitually promiscuous and have evaded the law like mice running past a lion, he’s found a severe act that, if taken literally, would cost your brother his life. He’s arrested him under it and plans to make an example of him by strictly applying this law. All hope is gone, unless you can soften Angelo with your pretty prayers. That’s the essence of this errand between you and your poor brother."
Doth he so seek his life?,Does he really intend to kill him?
"Has censured him Already; and, as I hear, the provost hath A warrant for his execution.","He’s already sentenced him to death, and I hear the provost has the warrant for his execution."
To do him good?,"Oh, dear! What can a poor girl like me do to help?"
Assay the power you have.,Test the power you have.
"My power? Alas, I doubt—",My power? I doubt—
"Our doubts are traitors By fearing to attempt. Go to Lord Angelo, And let him learn to know, when maidens sue, Men give like gods; but when they weep and kneel, All their petitions are as freely theirs","Our doubts work against us and make us lose the good things we often could win by making us scared to try. Go to Lord Angelo, and show him that when girls plead, men give like gods. But when girls cry and kneel, their requests are granted even more freely, as if the girls were asking themselves for permission."
I’ll see what I can do.,I’ll see what I can do.
But speedily.,Make it fast.
I will about it straight; No longer staying but to give the mother Commend me to my brother: soon at night I’ll send him certain word of my success.,"I’ll go straightaway, as soon as I give notice of my business to the Mother Superior. Thank you so much. Give my brother my love. I’ll let him know how I made out early this evening."
I take my leave of you.,I’ll go now.
"Good sir, adieu.","Goodbye, sir."
"We must not make a scarecrow of the law, Setting it up to fear the birds of prey, And let it keep one shape, till custom make it Their perch and not their terror.","We mustn’t let the law turn into a scarecrow—something you set up to scare away birds of prey but then never change, until the birds get so used to it that they sit on it rather than fear it."
"Let us be keen, and rather cut a little, Than fall, and bruise to death. Alas, this gentleman Whom I would save had a most noble father! Let but your honour know, That, in the working of your own affections, Had time cohered with place or place with wishing, Or that the resolute acting of your blood Could have attain’d the effect of your own purpose, Err’d in this point which now you censure him, And pull’d the law upon you.","Yes, but we should also be precise. Better to use a scalpel than a hatchet, cutting carefully instead of chopping to death. This gentleman whose life I’d like to save had such a noble father. I know you’re a completely disciplined, virtuous man. But imagine you felt sexual stirrings for a woman, and you were in the right place at the right time, and by acting on that desire you could have her. If sometime in your life, you’d made the same mistake for which you now condemn him, you’d have brought the law down on yourself."
"’Tis one thing to be tempted, Escalus, Another thing to fall. I not deny, May in the sworn twelve have a thief or two Guiltier than him they try. What’s open made to justice, That justice seizes: what know the laws That thieves do pass on thieves? ’Tis very pregnant, Because we see it; but what we do not see We tread upon, and never think of it. You may not so extenuate his offence For I have had such faults; but rather tell me, Let mine own judgment pattern out my death, And nothing come in partial. Sir, he must die.","It’s one thing to be tempted, Escalus, but another thing to give in. I don’t deny that the twelve members of a jury might include a thief or two who are far guiltier than the prisoner they’re passing sentence on. But justice takes the opportunities it has; who knows what laws thieves pass against other thieves? Obviously, if we stumble across a jewel in the road, we’ll bend down and take it, because we see it. But things we don’t see, we step over and never think about. You can’t excuse his crime on the grounds that I could have done the same thing. Instead, if I—the man who’s condemning him—commit the same offense, let this verdict of mine act as a precedent for my death, and let no allowances be made for me. Sir, he must die."
Be it as your wisdom will.,As you command.
Where is the provost?,Where is the provost?
"Here, if it like your honour.","Here, sir."
"See that Claudio Be executed by nine to-morrow morning: Bring him his confessor, let him be prepared; For that’s the utmost of his pilgrimage.","See that Claudio is executed by nine tomorrow morning. Give him a priest to confess to, and let him prepare himself for death, for this is his journey’s end."
"Some rise by sin, and some by virtue fall: Some run from brakes of ice, and answer none: And some condemned for a fault alone.","(to himself) Well, heaven forgive him—and forgive us all! Some people succeed by sinning, and some are brought down by virtue. Some people run from dubious situations and so never suffer punishment, and some people get punished for a single mistake."
"Come, bring them away: if these be good people in common houses, I know no law: bring them away.","Bring them this way. If these aren’t the kind of people who do nothing but dirty things in whorehouses, then I don’t know the law. Bring them this way."
"How now, sir! What’s your name? and what’s the matter?","Well, sir! What’s your name? And what’s the matter?"
"If it Please your honour, I am the poor duke’s constable, and my name is Elbow: I do lean upon honour two notorious benefactors.","If it pleases your honor, I am the duke’s poor police officer, and my name is Elbow. I rely on the law, sir, and bring in here before you two notorious benefactors (confusing the word benefactor with malefactor)."
Benefactors? Well; what benefactors are they? are they not malefactors?,Benefactors? What benefactors are they? Aren’t they malefactors?
"If it please your honour, I know not well what they of; and void of all profanation in the world that good Christians ought to have.","If it pleases your honor, I don’t really know what they are. But they’re definitely scoundrels, that I’m sure of, and lacking the universal piety that all good Christians ought to have."
This comes off well; here’s a wise officer.,"(to Angelo, sarcastically) He’s a good talker, and a real smart cop."
Go to: what quality are they of? Elbow is your,"Out with it. What’s their rank? Your name’s Elbow? Why don’t you speak, Elbow?"
"He cannot, sir; he’s out at elbow.","He can’t, sir. He’s been pushed out of the way."
"What are you, sir?","(to Pompey) What do you do, sir?"
"He, sir! a tapster, sir; parcel-bawd; one that serves a bad woman; whose house, sir, was, as they professes a hot-house, which, I think, is a very ill house too.","Him, sir! He’s a bartender, sir, and a part-time pimp, one who works for a madam. Her brothel in the suburbs, sir, was, as they say, torn down, and now she claims to run a bathhouse, and I think that’s a bad house too."
How know you that?,How do you know that?
"My wife, sir, whom I detest before heaven and your honour,— (confusing detest with attest)","My wife sir, whom I detest with heaven and your honor as my witnesses—"
How? thy wife?,"What, you detest your wife?"
"Ay, sir; whom, I thank heaven, is an honest woman,—","Yes, sir, whom, I thank heaven, is a morally upright woman—"
Dost thou detest her therefore?,That’s why you detest her?
"I say, sir, I will detest myself also, as well as she, that this house, if it be not a bawd’s house,","I say, sir, I’ll detest myself as well as her, if this house, if it’s not a whorehouse, it’s a great pity, for it’s an immoral place."
"How dost thou know that, constable?",How do you know that?
"Marry, sir, by my wife; who, if she had been a woman cardinally given, might have been accused in fornication, adultery, and all uncleanliness there.","From my wife, who, if she had been a woman given to sin, might have been accused of fornication, adultery, and all sorts of dirty things there."
By the woman’s means?,Because of the actions of the madam of the whorehouse?
"Ay, sir, by Mistress Overdone’s means: but as she spit in his face, so she defied him.","Yes, sir, by Mistress Overdone’s doing. But my wife spit in this man’s face, defying him."
"Sir, if it please your honour, this is not so.","Please, sir, this is not true."
"Prove it before these varlets here, thou honourable","Prove it before these rogues here, you honorable man. Prove it."
Do you hear how he misplaces?,(to Angelo) Do you hear how he mixes up his words?
"Sir, she came in great with child; and longing, saving your honour’s reverence, for stewed prunes; sir, we had but two in the house, which at that very dish of some three-pence; your honours have seen such dishes; they are not China dishes, but very good dishes,—","Sir, this very pregnant woman came in, longing—I beg your honor’s pardon—for stewed prunes a dish commonly served as a cure for syphilis in brothels, which were also called “stews” stewed prunes . Sir, we had only two in the house, which at that very time were sitting, it so happened, in a fruit dish, a three-cent dish. Your honors have seen such dishes; they’re not fine china, but they’re very good dishes—"
"Go to, go to: no matter for the dish, sir.","Get on with it. Never mind about the dish, sir."
"the right: but to the point. As I say, this Mistress Elbow, being, as I say, with child, and being great-bellied, and longing, as I said, for prunes; and having but two in the dish, as I said, rest, as I said, and, as I say, paying for them very honestly; for, as you know, Master Froth, I could not give you three-pence again.","No, sir, you’re right. It’s not worth a pin, but back to the point. As I was saying, this Mrs. Elbow, was, as I say, very pregnant, and longing, as I said, for prunes. We had only two left in the dish, as I said, and this very man, Mr. Froth here, having eaten the rest and paid for them very generously. Because as you know, Mr. Froth, I couldn’t give you three cents’ change."
"No, indeed.","No, indeed."
"cracking the stones of the foresaid prunes,—","Very well. If you remember, you were talking about the previously mentioned prunes—"
"Ay, so I did indeed.","Right, I was."
"Why, very well; I telling you then, if you be remembered, that such a one and such a one were past good diet, as I told you,—","Ok, and I was telling you, if you remember, that so-and-so couldn’t be cured of you-know-what syphilis you-know-what , unless they kept to a strict diet—"
All this is true.,All this is true.
"Why, very well, then,—","Why, very well, then—"
"Come, you are a tedious fool: to the purpose. What complain of? Come me to what was done to her.",You’re a tedious fool. Get to the point. What was done to Elbow’s wife that gave him a reason to complain? Come and get to what was done to her.
"Sir, your honour cannot come to that yet.","Sir, your honor can’t get to that yet."
"No, sir, nor I mean it not.","That’s not what I meant, sir."
"Sir, but you shall come to it, by your honour’s here, sir; a man of four-score pound a year; whose father died at Hallowmas: was’t not at Hallowmas, Master Froth?","But you will get it, sir, if your honor pleases. And, I beg you, look at Mr. Froth here, sir; a man who makes only pounds a year and whose his father died, leaving him an inheritance, on All Saints’ Day—wasn’t it All Saints’ Day, Mr. Froth?"
All-hallond eve.,Halloween.
"sitting, as I say, in a lower chair, sir; ’twas in the Bunch of Grapes, where indeed you have a delight to sit, have you not?","Very well. I hope we’ll get to the truth here. He, sir, was sitting, as I say, in a reclining chair, sir. It was at the Bunch of Grapes tavern, where you like to sit and relax, don’t you?"
I have so; because it is an open room and good for winter.,"I do, because the room has a big open fire, good in winter."
"Why, very well, then; I hope here be truths.","Why, very well, then. I hope we’ll get to the truth here."
"This will last out a night in Russia, When nights are longest there: I’ll take my leave. And leave you to the hearing of the cause; Hoping you’ll find good cause to whip them all.","This could last as long as a night in Russia, during the time of year when nights are longest. I’m leaving. I’ll leave you to get to the bottom of this case, hoping you’ll find reasons to whip them all."
I think no less. Good morrow to your lordship.,"I think I will. Good-bye, your lordship."
"Now, sir, come on: what was done to Elbow’s wife, once more?","Now, sir, come on: what happened to Elbow’s wife, once more?"
"Once, sir? there was nothing done to her once.","Once, sir? Nothing happened to her once."
"I beseech you, sir, ask him what this man did to my wife.","I beg you, sir, ask him what this man did to my wife."
"I beseech your honour, ask me.","I beg your honor, ask me."
"Well, sir; what did this gentleman to her?","Well, sir; what did this gentleman do to her?"
"I beseech you, sir, look in this gentleman’s face. Good Master Froth, look upon his honour; ’tis for a good purpose. Doth your honour mark his face?","I beg you, sir, look at this gentleman’s face. Good Mr. Froth, look at his honor—it’s for a good reason. Does your honor see his face?"
"Ay, sir, very well.","Yes, sir, very well."
"Nay; I beseech you, mark it well.","No, I beg you, really study it."
"Well, I do so.","Well, I am."
Doth your honour see any harm in his face?,Does your honor see any harm in his face?
"Why, no.","Why, no."
"I’ll be supposed upon a book, his face is the worst worst thing about him, how could Master Froth do the constable’s wife any harm? I would know that of your honour.","I’ll swear upon a bible, his face is the worst thing about him (confusing supposed for deposed). And if his face is the worst thing about him, how could Mr. Froth do the officer’s wife any harm? I’d like your honor to explain that."
"He’s in the right. Constable, what say you to it?","He’s right. Officer, what do you say to that?"
"house; next, this is a respected fellow; and his mistress is a respected woman.","(confusing respected for suspected throughout) First, if it pleases you, the house is a respected house; next, this is a respected fellow, and his employer a respected woman."
"By this hand, sir, his wife is a more respected person than any of us all.","I swear, sir, his wife is a more respected person than any of us."
"time has yet to come that she was ever respected with man, woman, or child.","Scoundrel, you lie. You lie, wicked scoundrel! The time has yet to come that she was ever respected by man, woman, or child."
"Sir, she was respected with him before he married with her.","Sir, he respected her before he married her."
Which is the wiser here? Justice or Iniquity? Is,Who’s smarter here? The representative of justice or the representative of sin “Justice” and “Iniquity” were names of common characters in morality plays representative of justice or the representative of sin ? Is this true?
"O thou caitiff! O thou varlet! O thou wicked Hannibal! I respected with her before I was married to her! If ever I was respected with her, or she with me, let not your worship think me the poor I’ll have mine action of battery on thee.","Oh, you wretch! Oh, you scoundrel! Oh, you cannibal! I respected her before I was married to her! If I ever respected her, or she respected me, I’m not the duke’s poor officer. Prove this, you wicked cannibal, or I’ll sue you for assault."
"If he took you a box o’ the ear, you might have your action of slander too.","If he boxed your ears, you could sue him for slander, too."
"Marry, I thank your good worship for it. What is’t","Thank you, your worship. What would you like me to do with this wicked wretch?"
"Truly, officer, because he hath some offences in him that thou wouldst discover if thou couldst, let him continue in his courses till thou knowest what they are.","Honestly, officer, because he’s committed some crime that you would expose if you were capable, let him keep on until you figure out what it is."
"wicked varlet, now, what’s come upon thee: thou art to continue now, thou varlet; thou art to continue.","Thank you, your worship. Now, you wicked wretch, you see what’s going to happen to you: you’re to be kept on; they’re keeping you on."
"Where were you born, friend?","Where were you born, friend?"
"Here in Vienna, sir.","Here in Vienna, sir."
Are you of fourscore pounds a year?,Do you have an income of pounds a year?
"Yes, an’t please you, sir.","Yes, sir."
"So. What trade are you of, sir?","All right. What do you do, sir?"
Tapster; a poor widow’s tapster.,Bartender; a poor widow’s bartender.
Your mistress’ name?,Your employer’s name?
Mistress Overdone.,Mistress Overdone.
Hath she had any more than one husband?,Has she had more than one husband?
"Nine, sir; Overdone by the last.","Nine, sir. She got the name Overdone from the last one."
"Nine! Come hither to me, Master Froth. Master Froth, I would not have you acquainted with will hang them. Get you gone, and let me hear no more of you.","Nine! Come here, Mr. Froth. Mr. Froth, I’d prefer you not associate with bartenders. They’ll draw you dry, Mr. Froth, and you’ll get them hanged a play on “hanging and drawing,” a form of execution involving hanging and then disemboweling They’ll draw you dry, Mr. Froth, and you’ll get them hanged . Get out, and don’t let me hear of you again."
"I thank your worship. For mine own part, I never come into any room in a tap-house, but I am drawn","Thank you, your worship. Personally, I never go into bars, unless I’m drawn in a play on ale being drawn from a tap drawn in ."
"Well, no more of it, Master Froth: farewell.","Well, not anymore, Mr. Froth. Goodbye."
"Come you hither to me, Master tapster. What’s your name, Master tapster?","Come here, Mr. Bartender. What’s your name, Mr. Bartender?"
Pompey.,Pompey.
What else?,What else?
"Bum, sir.","Ass, sir."
"Troth, and your bum is the greatest thing about you; so that in the beastliest sense you are Pompey the Great. Pompey, you are partly a bawd, Pompey, not? come, tell me true: it shall be the better for you.","Yes, and your ass is the biggest thing about you, so in the crudest sense you are Pompey the Great. Pompey, you’re a part-time pimp, however much you hide it by bartending, aren’t you? Come on, it’ll be better for you if you tell me the truth."
"Truly, sir, I am a poor fellow that would live.","Honestly, sir, I’m a poor man just trying to earn a living."
"How would you live, Pompey? by being a bawd? What do you think of the trade, Pompey? is it a lawful trade?","How would you live, Pompey? By being a pimp? What do you think of that profession, Pompey? Is it a legal profession?"
"If the law would allow it, sir.","If the law allowed it, sir."
"But the law will not allow it, Pompey; nor it shall not be allowed in Vienna.","But the law will not allow it, Pompey, nor will it be allowed in Vienna."
Does your worship mean to geld and splay all the youth of the city?,Does your worship mean to castrate and spay all the young men and women in town?
"No, Pompey.","No, Pompey."
"Truly, sir, in my poor opinion, they will to’t then. If your worship will take order for the drabs and the knaves, you need not to fear the bawds.","Then, sir, in my poor opinion, they’ll get it on. If your worship would make arrangements for the whores and their clients, you wouldn’t need to fear the pimps."
"There are pretty orders beginning, I can tell you:","I can tell you, we’re introducing some strong penalties— specifically, beheading and hanging."
"If you head and hang all that offend that way but for ten year together, you’ll be glad to give out a commission for more heads: if this law hold in Vienna ten year, I’ll rent the fairest house in it come to pass, say Pompey told you so.","If you behead and hang everyone who breaks the law by having sex, in just ten years you’ll have to commission people to repopulate the city. If this law lasts a decade in Vienna, I’ll rent the best house in town at three cents a square foot. If you’re alive to see this, say Pompey told you so."
"Thank you, good Pompey; and, in requital of your prophecy, hark you: I advise you, let me not find you before me again upon any complaint whatsoever; I shall beat you to your tent, and prove a shrewd Caesar to you; in plain dealing, Pompey, I shall have you whipt: so, for this time, Pompey, fare you well.","Thank you, Pompey, and, in return for your prediction, listen carefully. I advise you, don’t let me find you appearing before me again upon any complaint whatsoever, not even for living where you do. If I do, I’ll beat you like Julius Caesar did to your namesake— Pompey In Shakespeare’s Julius Caesar, Caesar defeats a rival named Pompey Pompey —and send you scurrying to your tent in defeat. To put it plainly, Pompey, I will have you whipped. So, for now, Pompey, goodbye."
I thank your worship for your good counsel:,I thank your worship for your good advice.
"better determine. Whip me? No, no; let carman whip his jade: The valiant heart is not whipt out of his trade.","But I shall follow it only as my body and my opportunities dictate. Whip me? No, no; let a cart driver whip his old nag. A brave heart isn’t whipped out of his job."
"Come hither to me, Master Elbow; come hither, master","Come here, Mr. Elbow; come here, Mr. Policeman. How long have you been a policeman?"
"Seven year and a half, sir.","Seven and a half years, sir."
"I thought, by your readiness in the office, you had continued in it some time. You say, seven years together?","I thought you’d been at the job for a while, given your skill at it. You say seven years altogether?"
"And a half, sir.","And a half, sir."
wrong to put you so oft upon ’t: are there not men in your ward sufficient to serve it?,"Oh, that’s so hard on you. It’s wrong that you have to work so much. Aren’t there enough capable men in your precinct?"
"Faith, sir, few of any wit in such matters: as they are chosen, they are glad to choose me for them; I all.","Honestly, sir, few who are bright enough. They’re happy to have me substitute for them. They pay me a little money, and I handle all the duties."
"Look you bring me in the names of some six or seven, the most sufficient of your parish.","Please bring me some six or seven names, the most competent people in your parish."
"To your worship’s house, sir?","To your worship’s house, sir?"
To my house. Fare you well.,To my house. Goodbye.
"What’s o’clock, think you?",What time is it?
"Eleven, sir.","Eleven, sir."
I pray you home to dinner with me.,"Please, come home to lunch with me."
I humbly thank you.,I’m most grateful. Thank you.
But there’s no remedy.,"Claudio’s death saddens me, but there’s no way to prevent it."
Lord Angelo is severe.,Lord Angelo is severe.
"It is but needful: Mercy is not itself, that oft looks so; But yet,—poor Claudio! There is no remedy. Come, sir.","It’s unfortunately necessary. Mercy isn’t often what it seems, since pardoning a crime can lead to additional pain. Even so—poor Claudio! There’s no way to prevent it. Let’s go, sir."
He’s hearing of a cause; he will come straight I’ll tell him of you.,"He’s listening to a case. He’ll come at once, when I tell him you’re here."
"Pray you, do.",Please do.
"I’ll know He hath but as offended in a dream! All sects, all ages smack of this vice; and he To die for’t!",I’ll ask him his intentions; maybe he’ll relent. Claudio didn’t consciously commit a crime. People of every class and age indulge in this vice—and he’s going to die for it!
"Now, what’s the matter. Provost?","Now, what’s the matter, Provost?"
Is it your will Claudio shall die tomorrow?,Do you want Claudio to die tomorrow?
Did not I tell thee yea? Hadst thou not order? Why dost thou ask again?,Did I not tell you yes? Don’t you have your orders? Why do you ask again?
"Lest I might be too rash: Under your good correction, I have seen, Repented o’er his doom.","In case I might be too rash. Correct me if I’m wrong, but I’ve seen judges regret imposing the death sentence after the execution."
"Go to; let that be mine: Do you your office, or give up your place, And you shall well be spared.","Enough—that’s my problem. Do your job, or resign your position. We can easily do without you."
"What shall be done, sir, with the groaning Juliet? She’s very near her hour.","I beg your honor’s pardon. What should we do, sir, with Juliet? She’s in labor, very close to giving birth."
"Dispose of her To some more fitter place, and that with speed.","Make arrangements to get her to a more appropriate place, and do it quickly."
Desires access to you.,The condemned man’s sister is here and wants to speak to you.
Hath he a sister?,He has a sister?
"Ay, my good lord; a very virtuous maid, And to be shortly of a sisterhood,","Yes, my good lord—a very virtuous girl who’s entering a convent, if she hasn’t already."
"Well, let her be admitted.","Well, bring her in."
"See you the fornicatress be removed: Let have needful, but not lavish, means; There shall be order for’t.","See that the tramp Juliet is moved, and provide her with everything she needs, but nothing extravagant. I’ll authorize it."
God save your honour!,(departing) God save your honor!
Stay a little while.,Don’t leave yet.
You’re welcome: what’s your will?,Welcome. What do you want?
"I am a woeful suitor to your honour, Please but your honour hear me.","I sadly beg a request of your honor. Please hear me, your honor."
Well; what’s your suit?,"Well, what’s your request?"
"There is a vice that most I do abhor, And most desire should meet the blow of justice; For which I would not plead, but that I must; For which I must not plead, but that I am","There’s a certain vice that I hate, and would love to see struck down by law. I’d rather not plead for it, but I must. I shouldn’t plead for it, but I’m torn between wanting and not wanting to."
Well; the matter?,"Well, what’s the matter?"
"I have a brother is condemn’d to die: I do beseech you, let it be his fault, And not my brother.","I have a brother who’s condemned to death. I beg you, condemn his crime but not him."
[Aside] Heaven give thee moving graces!,(to himself) Heaven give you the power to persuade him!
"Condemn the fault and not the actor of it? Why, every fault’s condemn’d ere it be done: Mine were the very cipher of a function, To fine the faults whose fine stands in record,","Condemn the crime and not the person who commits it? Why, by definition every crime is condemned before it’s committed. I would have a meaningless role if I just punished the crimes whose penalties were in the law books and let the criminal go."
"O just but severe law! I had a brother, then. Heaven keep your honour!","Oh, fair but harsh law! Then I had a brother but don’t anymore. (departing) Heaven protect your honor!"
"[Aside to ISABELLA] Give’t not o’er so: to him again, entreat him; You are too cold; if you should need a pin, You could not with more tame a tongue desire it: To him, I say!","(aside to ISABELLA) Don’t give up so fast. Go to him again, beg him, kneel down before him, cling to his gown. You’re too cold. You couldn’t be more casual if you were asking him for a pin. Go to him."
Must he needs die?,Does he have to die?
"Maiden, no remedy.","Miss, there’s no way out."
"Yes; I do think that you might pardon him, And neither heaven nor man grieve at the mercy.","Yes, there is. I think that you could pardon him, and no one on heaven or earth would be sorry."
I will not do’t.,I won’t do it.
"But can you, if you would?","But could you, if you wanted to?"
"Look, what I will not, that I cannot do.","Look, what I won’t do, I can’t do."
"But might you do’t, and do the world no wrong, If so your heart were touch’d with that remorse As mine is to him?","But might you do it, without harming the world, if your heart felt as compassionate toward him as mine does?"
He’s sentenced; ’tis too late.,He’s sentenced; it’s too late.
[Aside to ISABELLA] You are too cold.,(aside to ISABELLA) You’re too cold.
"Too late? why, no; I, that do speak a word. May call it back again. Well, believe this, No ceremony that to great ones ’longs, Not the king’s crown, nor the deputed sword, Become them with one half so good a grace As mercy does. If he had been as you and you as he, You would have slipt like him; but he, like you,","Too late? why, no—I can speak a word and then take it back. Believe this: no symbol of authority—not the king’s crown, or the deputy’s sword, or the military officer’s baton, or the judge’s robe—makes a person great as much as mercy does. If he’d been you and you’d been him, you would have slipped like he did; but he, in your place, wouldn’t have been so stern."
"Pray you, be gone.",Please leave.
"I would to heaven I had your potency, And you were Isabel! should it then be thus? No; I would tell what ’twere to be a judge,","I wish to heaven I had your power, and you were Isabel! Would things be like this? No, I’d decide what it is to be a judge, and to be a prisoner."
"[Aside to ISABELLA] Ay, touch him; there’s the vein.","(aside to ISABELLA) Yes, that’s the way to talk."
"Your brother is a forfeit of the law, And you but waste your words.",Your brother is doomed for breaking the law. You’re wasting your breath.
"Alas, alas! And He that might the vantage best have took Found out the remedy. How would you be, If He, which is the top of judgment, should But judge you as you are? O, think on that; Like man new made.","How sad! Why, all the souls on earth were doomed once upon a time because Adam and Eve disobeyed God and ate from the tree of knowledge doomed once upon a time . And God, who might have seized the chance to condemn us, instead found a way to redeem our sins a reference to God letting Christ die to redeem mankind’s sins found a way to redeem our sins . What would happen to you, if he who is the highest judge of all should judge you as you are now? Oh, think about that, and then merciful speech will flow out your mouth, as if you had been reborn."
"Be you content, fair maid; It is the law, not I condemn your brother: Were he my kinsman, brother, or my son,","Accept it, lovely lady. It’s the law, not I, that condemns your brother. Were he my cousin, brother, or my son, it’d be the same. He must die tomorrow."
"To-morrow! O, that’s sudden! Spare him, spare him! He’s not prepared for death. Even for our kitchens We kill the fowl of season: shall we serve heaven With less respect than we do minister Who is it that hath died for this offence? There’s many have committed it.","Tomorrow! Oh, that’s so sudden! Spare him, spare him! He’s not prepared for death. We only kill fowl in season, when they’re in the best shape for eating. Should we serve him up to heaven with less respect than we show toward our inferior mortal bodies? My good, good lord, consider: who else has died for this crime? Many people have committed it."
"[Aside to ISABELLA] Ay, well said.","(aside to ISABELLA) Yes, well said."
"The law hath not been dead, though it hath slept: If the first that did the edict infringe Had answer’d for his deed: now ’tis awake Takes note of what is done; and, like a prophet, Looks in a glass, that shows what future evils, And so in progress to be hatch’d and born, Are now to have no successive degrees, But, ere they live, to end.","The law wasn’t dead, but it was asleep. All those people wouldn’t have dared to commit that crime if the first lawbreaker had been punished. Now the law’s awake, notes what’s going on, and, like a fortuneteller, looks in a crystal ball to see what future evils, either newly conceived or just being contemplated, will someday hatch. Now, they won’t develop any further but will die before they’re born."
Yet show some pity.,Show some pity.
"For then I pity those I do not know, Which a dismiss’d offence would after gall; And do him right that, answering one foul wrong, Lives not to act another. Be satisfied;","I show it most of all when I show justice, for then I pity all those people I don’t know who’d be harmed by an unpunished crime. I do right to the man who, by paying for one wrong act, doesn’t live to commit another one. Be satisfied with this. Your brother dies tomorrow. Accept it."
"So you must be the first that gives this sentence, And he, that suffer’s. O, it is excellent To have a giant’s strength; but it is tyrannous To use it like a giant.","So you must be the first one to impose this sentence, and he the first one to suffer it. Oh, it’s excellent to have a giant’s strength, but it’s tyranny to use it like a giant."
[Aside to ISABELLA] That’s well said.,(aside to ISABELLA) That’s well said.
"Could great men thunder As Jove himself does, Jove would ne’er be quiet, For every pelting, petty officer Would use his heaven for thunder; Thou rather with thy sharp and sulphurous bolt Split’st the unwedgeable and gnarled oak Than the soft myrtle: but man, proud man, Drest in a little brief authority, His glassy essence, like an angry ape, Plays such fantastic tricks before high heaven As make the angels weep; who, with our spleens, Would all themselves laugh mortal.","If men of power could thunder and wield lightning as the god Jove king of the gods in Roman mythology Jove himself does, Jove would never have any peace, for every puny, petty official would use his heaven for thunder, nothing but thunder! Merciful Heaven, you use your sharp, sulfur-scented lightning bolts to split the hard gnarled oak tree, rather than the soft myrtle bush. But give a proud man a little bit of temporary authority and he forgets what it means to be made in God’s image. Instead, like an angry ape that mimics people’s behavior, he does such incredibly grotesque things before high heaven that the angels, if they were human, would either weep or die laughing."
will relent; He’s coming; I perceive ’t.,"(aside to ISABELLA) Oh, keep at him, keep at him, girl! He’s going to relent. He’s coming around, I can tell."
[Aside] Pray heaven she win him!,(to himself) Pray heaven she wins him over!
We cannot weigh our brother with ourself: But in the less foul profanation.,"We can’t use ourselves as a standard to judge others. Great men may joke about the saints; that’s good fun. But if an ordinary person does it, it’s profane."
"Thou’rt i’ the right, girl; more o, that.","You’re right, girl. Keep talking like that."
"That in the captain’s but a choleric word, Which in the soldier is flat blasphemy.","When a captain curses, it’s just angry words. When a private does it, it’s blasphemy."
[Aside to ISABELLA] Art avised o’ that? more on ’t.,(aside to ISABELLA) You know about that sort of stuff? Tell us more.
Why do you put these sayings upon me?,Why are you attacking me with these sayings?
"Because authority, though it err like others, Hath yet a kind of medicine in itself, That skins the vice o’ the top. Go to your bosom; That’s like my brother’s fault: if it confess A natural guiltiness such as is his, Let it not sound a thought upon your tongue Against my brother’s life.","Because people in authority, even though they sin like everyone else, apply a sort of bandage to cover—but not cure—their sinful sores. Look in your heart and ask yourself if you’ve ever experienced anything like my brother’s crime. If your heart admits to being guilty of the same natural impulses, don’t say a word to condemn my brother."
"Such sense, that my sense breeds with it. Fare you well.","(to himself) She speaks with such sense, she’s got my senses and desire stirred up. Goodbye."
"Gentle my lord, turn back.","My gracious lord, come back."
I will bethink me: come again tomorrow.,I’ll consider the matter. Come again tomorrow.
"Hark how I’ll bribe you: good my lord, turn back.","I’ll bribe you—come back, my good lord."
How! bribe me?,What? Bribe me?
"Ay, with such gifts that heaven shall share with you.","Yes, with gifts from heaven."
[Aside to ISABELLA] You had marr’d all else.,(aside to ISABELLA) You nearly blew it.
"Not with fond shekels of the tested gold, Or stones whose rates are either rich or poor That shall be up at heaven and enter there Ere sun-rise, prayers from preserved souls, From fasting maids whose minds are dedicate To nothing temporal.","Not with silly coins of real gold, or jewels whose value rises and falls, depending on fashion; but with constant prayers that will rise up and enter heaven before dawn—the prayers of protected souls, nuns whose minds are dedicated only to spiritual things."
Well; come to me to-morrow.,"Well, come see me tomorrow."
[Aside to ISABELLA] Go to; ’tis well; away!,"(aside to ISABELLA) Great, that’s enough. Let’s go!"
Heaven keep your honour safe!,Heaven keep your honor safe!
"[Aside] Amen: For I am that way going to temptation,","(to himself) Amen—for I’m falling into temptation, where desires and prayers work against each other."
At what hour to-morrow Shall I attend your lordship?,What time tomorrow should I come to your lordship?
At any time ’fore noon.,Anytime before noon.
’Save your honour!,God save your honor!
"What’s this, what’s this? Is this her fault or mine? The tempter or the tempted, who sins most? Ha! Not she: nor doth she tempt: but it is I Do as the carrion does, not as the flower, Corrupt with virtuous season. Can it be That modesty may more betray our sense Than woman’s lightness? Having waste ground enough, And pitch our evils there? O, fie, fie, fie! What dost thou, or what art thou, Angelo? Dost thou desire her foully for those things That make her good? O, let her brother live! When judges steal themselves. What, do I love her, That I desire to hear her speak again, And feast upon her eyes? What is’t I dream on? O cunning enemy, that, to catch a saint, Is that temptation that doth goad us on To sin in loving virtue: never could the strumpet, With all her double vigour, art and nature, Once stir my temper; but this virtuous maid When men were fond, I smiled and wonder’d how.","From you, and from your virtue, too! What’s happening? Is this her fault or mine? The tempter or the tempted, who sins the most? Ha! It’s not her, she’s not trying to be a tempter. It’s me. It’s like I’m lying in a field of violets, only instead of blossoming and smelling like a flower, I’m rotting and stinking like a corpse from the same sun that makes the flowers grow. Is it possible that a modest woman can arouse desire more than a seductive one? Having destroyed enough land already, should a person want to tear down a holy place and establish evil there as well? Oh, damn, damn, damn! Angelo, what are you doing, who are you? Do you sinfully desire her for the things that make her good? Oh, I should let her brother live! Thieves are justified in robbing when the judges themselves are thieves. Can it be I’m in love with her, when I want to hear her speak again, and gaze into her eyes? What am I dreaming of? Oh, the devil’s a cunning enemy—to catch a saint, he baits the hook with saints! The most dangerous temptation is the one that uses our love of goodness to draw us into sin. A prostitute could never attract me, even with her two powers: her seductive skills and her natural endowments. But this virtuous girl totally overwhelms me. Whenever I saw men who were infatuated like idiots, I smiled and didn’t understand—up until now."
"Hail to you, provost! so I think you are.","Hello, Provost—I think that’s who you are."
"I am the provost. What’s your will, good friar?","I am the provost. What do you want, good friar?"
"Bound by my charity and my blest order, I come to visit the afflicted spirits To let me see them and to make me know The nature of their crimes, that I may minister To them accordingly.","My sense of charity and my religious order make it my duty to come visit the troubled souls here in prison. Grant me the clergy’s usual right to see them, and tell me the nature of their crimes, so I may minister to them accordingly."
"I would do more than that, if more were needful.","I’d do more than that, if it were needed."
"Who, falling in the flaws of her own youth, Hath blister’d her report: she is with child; And he that got it, sentenced; a young man More fit to do another such offence","Look, here comes one: a gentlewoman in my charge who, by giving in to her youthful passion, has ruined her reputation. She’s pregnant, and the child’s father is sentenced to death. He’s just a young man, who deserves the chance to make more babies, rather than to die for this one."
When must he die?,When must he die?
"As I do think, to-morrow.","Tomorrow, I think."
"I have provided for you: stay awhile, And you shall be conducted.","I’ve gotten accommodations for you. Wait here, and you’ll be escorted to them."
"Repent you, fair one, of the sin you carry?","Pretty one, do you repent the sin you’re carrying?"
I do; and bear the shame most patiently.,"I do, and patiently bear the shame."
"I’ll teach you how you shall arraign your conscience, And try your penitence, if it be sound, Or hollowly put on.","I’ll teach you how to examine your conscience, and to test if your repentance is real or insincere."
I’ll gladly learn.,I’ll gladly learn.
Love you the man that wrong’d you?,Do you love the man who wronged you?
"Yes, as I love the woman that wrong’d him.","Yes, as I love myself, the woman who wronged him."
So then it seems your most offenceful act Was mutually committed?,So then it seems your sinful act was mutually committed?
Mutually.,Mutually.
Then was your sin of heavier kind than his.,But your sin is heavier a play on words. “Heavier” means “more serious” but also refers literally to the heavy child Juliet carries heavier than his.
"I do confess it, and repent it, father.","I do confess it, and repent it, father."
"’Tis meet so, daughter: but lest you do repent, As that the sin hath brought you to this shame, Showing we would not spare heaven as we love it, But as we stand in fear,—","That’s appropriate, daughter. But if you’re only sorry because your sin’s been found out, that’s being sorry for yourself, not for offending Heaven. We tend to repent out of fear of God, rather than love for him—"
"I do repent me, as it is an evil, And take the shame with joy.",I repent because my act was evil. I’m happy to be ashamed of it.
"Your partner, as I hear, must die to-morrow, And I am going with instruction to him. Grace go with you, Benedicite!","Maintain that attitude. I hear your partner must die tomorrow, and I’m going to give him spiritual guidance. Grace go with you, and God bless you!"
"Must die to-morrow! O injurious love, Is still a dying horror!","Must die tomorrow! Oh, painful love! By making me pregnant, it’s spared my life the law spared a pregnant female prisoner from execution it’s spared my life . But that comfort means I have to live with the horror of Claudio’s death."
’Tis pity of him.,He’s to be pitied.
"When I would pray and think, I think and pray To several subjects. Heaven hath my empty words; Whilst my invention, hearing not my tongue, Anchors on Isabel: Heaven in my mouth, And in my heart the strong and swelling evil Of my conception. The state, whereon I studied Is like a good thing, being often read, Grown fear’d and tedious; yea, my gravity, Could I with boot change for an idle plume, Which the air beats for vain. O place, O form, How often dost thou with thy case, thy habit, Wrench awe from fools and tie the wiser souls Let’s write good angel on the devil’s horn: ’Tis not the devil’s crest.","When I try to pray and think, I think and pray about different things. My empty words “empty” here can mean two things: the first meaning is “absent-minded or without conviction,” since Angelo speaks to heaven but his thoughts are on Isabel; it also suggests “meaningless,” since his impure thoughts about Isabel prove he doesn’t mean the pious words he speaks. empty words focus on heaven, while my imagination ignores what I’m saying and fixates on Isabel. It’s as if I’m only mouthing God’s name, while an evil idea grows in my heart. The politics I used to study with such interest now seem dry and tedious. The dignity I was so proud of (I hope no one hears this) is now worth even less than some silly hat feather waving uselessly in the wind. Oh, how often do rank and ceremonial trappings impress the foolish and entrap even the wise! Passions are passions—they cannot simply be swept away. You can write “good angel” on the devil’s horns, but that doesn’t change his devilish nature."
How now! who’s there?,Hello! Who’s there?
"One Isabel, a sister, desires access to you.","One Isabel, a nun, wishes to see you."
Teach her the way.,Show her the way.
"O heavens! Why does my blood thus muster to my heart, Making both it unable for itself, And dispossessing all my other parts So play the foolish throngs with one that swoons; Come all to help him, and so stop the air By which he should revive: and even so The general, subject to a well-wish’d king, Crowd to his presence, where their untaught love Must needs appear offence.","Oh, heavens! Why does my blood rush to my heart, both choking it and making the rest of my body weak? It’s like a stupid crowd surrounding somebody who faints—they’re all trying to help him and actually they’re cutting off the air he needs. Or, like the common people who drop what they’re doing and rush over to see their beloved king when he appears, fawning and crowding him so much that their ignorant adoration becomes offensive."
"How now, fair maid?","How are you, pretty lady?"
I am come to know your pleasure.,I’ve come to find out what you want to do.
Than to demand what ’tis. Your brother cannot live.,If only you knew what I want to do and didn’t have to ask. Your brother cannot live.
Even so. Heaven keep your honour!,"Very well, then. Heaven keep your honor!"
"Yet may he live awhile; and, it may be, As long as you or I:","On the other hand, he may live awhile—maybe as long as you or me. Still, he must die."
Under your sentence?,By your command?
Yea.,Yes.
"When, I beseech you? that in his reprieve, Longer or shorter, he may be so fitted","I beg you, tell me when. So that, no matter how long or short his reprieve is, he’ll be spiritually prepared and can save his soul."
"Ha! fie, these filthy vices! It were as good To pardon him that hath from nature stolen A man already made, as to remit Their saucy sweetness that do coin heaven’s image Falsely to take away a life true made As to put metal in restrained means To make a false one.",Ha! Damn these filthy vices! One might as well pardon a murderer as forgive a fornicator who begets an illegitimate child. It’s as easy to take a legitimate life as it is to create an illegitimate one.
"’Tis set down so in heaven, but not in earth.","Heaven may regard the two sins as equal, but humans do not."
"Which had you rather, that the most just law Now took your brother’s life; or, to redeem him, Give up your body to such sweet uncleanness As she that he hath stain’d?","You think so? Then I’ll put this question to you: which would you prefer, that this very fair law took your brother’s life, or to save your brother, you give up your body to the same sort of sweet sin as did the girl he ruined?"
I had rather give my body than my soul.,"Sir, believe this, I’d rather give up my body than my soul."
I talk not of your soul: our compell’d sins Stand more for number than for accompt.,"I’m not talking about your soul: sins we’re compelled to commit get counted, but they don’t count against us."
How say you?,What are you saying?
"Against the thing I say. Answer to this: I, now the voice of the recorded law, Pronounce a sentence on your brother’s life: Might there not be a charity in sin","No, don’t hold me to that, for I can argue a point I don’t really believe. Answer this. As the voice of the written law, I pronounce a death sentence on your brother’s life. Might it not be charity to commit a sin to save this brother’s life?"
"Please you to do’t, I’ll take it as a peril to my soul, It is no sin at all, but charity.","If you want to do it, I’ll risk the punishment on my soul, and say it’d be no sin at all, but charity."
"Pleased you to do’t at peril of your soul,","If you felt like doing it, even at the risk of your soul, sin and charity would balance each other perfectly."
"That I do beg his life, if it be sin, Heaven let me bear it! you granting of my suit, If that be sin, I’ll make it my morn prayer To have it added to the faults of mine,","If begging for his life is a sin, Heaven let me bear it! If your granting my request is a sin, I’ll pray each morning to have it added to my faults and not one you have to answer for."
"Nay, but hear me. Your sense pursues not mine: either you are ignorant, Or seem so craftily; and that’s not good.","No, listen to me. You’re not following me. Either you’re dumb or you’re playing dumb, and that’s not good."
"Let me be ignorant, and in nothing good,","Call me dumb, then, and not very good. Let me accept by God’s grace that I’m not any better than that."
"Thus wisdom wishes to appear most bright When it doth tax itself; as these black masks Proclaim an enshield beauty ten times louder Than beauty could, display’d. But mark me; Your brother is to die.","This is how smart people try to seem really bright: by knocking their own intelligence. It’s the same way hiding behind a black mask makes a woman seem ten times more beautiful than her naked face does. But pay attention. I’ll be more blunt, so that you get it. Your brother is to die."
So.,Yes.
"And his offence is so, as it appears, Accountant to the law upon that pain.","That’s the penalty for his crime, under the law."
True.,True.
"Admit no other way to save his life,— As I subscribe not that, nor any other, But in the loss of question,—that you, his sister, Finding yourself desired of such a person, Could fetch your brother from the manacles Of the all-building law; and that there were No earthly mean to save him, but that either You must lay down the treasures of your body What would you do?","Suppose that there was no other way to save his life—not that I’m admitting this, it’s just for the sake of argument—let’s say that you, his sister, were desired by someone whose influence with the judge, or whose own powerful position, could rescue your brother from the law’s binding chains. And there was no other earthly way to save him, unless you gave your virginity to this hypothetical man, or else your brother dies. What would you do?"
"As much for my poor brother as myself: That is, were I under the terms of death, The impression of keen whips I’ld wear as rubies, That longing have been sick for, ere I’ld yield My body up to shame.","I would do this as much for my poor brother as myself—that is, if I were under a death sentence, I’d strip myself naked and display the whip’s bloody lashes like rubies. And I’d go to my death like going to my bed, before I’d surrender my body to sin."
Then must your brother die.,Then your brother must die.
"And ’twere the cheaper way: Than that a sister, by redeeming him, Should die for ever.",And that’s the better bargain. Better a brother die once than a sister suffer eternal damnation to save him.
Were not you then as cruel as the sentence That you have slander’d so?,Then aren’t you as cruel as the sentence you’ve so deplored?
Are of two houses: lawful mercy Is nothing kin to foul redemption.,A shameful release and an unconditional pardon are two different things. Legal mercy is in no way related to an immoral rescue.
You seem’d of late to make the law a tyrant; And rather proved the sliding of your brother,"You said a little while ago the law was tyrannical, arguing that your brother’s sinning was a lighthearted act, not a vice."
"O, pardon me, my lord; it oft falls out, To have what we would have, we speak not what we mean: I something do excuse the thing I hate, For his advantage that I dearly love.","Oh, forgive me, my lord. To get what we want, we often say things we don’t mean. I’ve made excuses for something I hate in order to help the brother I love."
We are all frail.,We’re all weak.
"Else let my brother die, If not a feodary, but only he Owe and succeed thy weakness.","Yes. Otherwise, my brother would deserve to die, if he were the only person to have inherited this weakness."
"Nay, women are frail too.","No, women are weak too."
"Which are as easy broke as they make forms. Women! Help Heaven! men their creation mar In profiting by them. Nay, call us ten times frail; For we are soft as our complexions are,","Yes, as weak their mirrors, which break as easily as they reflect images. Women—Heaven help us!—are ruined by men who take advantage of us. Call us frail ten times over, for we’re as soft as our skin, and gullible."
"I think it well: And from this testimony of your own sex,— Since I suppose we are made to be no stronger Than faults may shake our frames,—let me be bold; That is, a woman; if you be more, you’re none; If you be one, as you are well express’d By all external warrants, show it now, By putting on the destined livery.","I agree. And based on what you say about your sex—since I suppose we’re only as strong as our own weakest points—let me be bold. I take you at your word. Be what you are—a woman, that is. If you are better than that, then you’re not a woman. But if you are one, as you certainly seem to be by all outward appearances, show it now by being weak."
Let me entreat you speak the former language.,"I can only speak with a sincere tongue. My gentle lord, please talk plainly, as you did before."
"Plainly conceive, I love you.","To put it plainly, I love you."
"My brother did love Juliet, And you tell me that he shall die for it.","My brother loved Juliet, and you tell me that he’ll die for it."
"He shall not, Isabel, if you give me love.","He won’t, Isabel, if you give me love."
"I know your virtue hath a licence in’t, Which seems a little fouler than it is, To pluck on others.","I know your virtue gives you the freedom to act wicked, in order to test others."
"Believe me, on mine honour,","Believe me, I swear I mean what I say."
"Ha! little honour to be much believed, And most pernicious purpose! Seeming, seeming! I will proclaim thee, Angelo; look for’t: Sign me a present pardon for my brother, What man thou art.","What! To believe so much in someone with so little honor and such evil intentions! You deceiver! I’ll denounce you, Angelo, believe me. Sign a pardon for my brother immediately, or I’ll scream to the entire world what sort of man you are."
"Who will believe thee, Isabel? My unsoil’d name, the austereness of my life, My vouch against you, and my place i’ the state, That you shall stifle in your own report And smell of calumny. I have begun, And now I give my sensual race the rein: Fit thy consent to my sharp appetite; That banish what they sue for; redeem thy brother By yielding up thy body to my will; Or else he must not only die the death, But thy unkindness shall his death draw out Or, by the affection that now guides me most, I’ll prove a tyrant to him. As for you, Say what you can, my false o’erweighs your true.","Who will believe you, Isabel? My spotless reputation, my strict way of living, my testimony against you, and my position will all outweigh your accusation. You’ll be silenced and discredited, accused of slander. The starting gate is open now, and my desires are off and running. Feed my hunger—no more of your modesty and time-wasting blushes, which charm me and then banish me for being charmed. Save your brother by sleeping with me, or he’ll be put to death. And not only that, but it’ll be death by torture, drawn out by your cruelty. Accept my offer tomorrow, or by my almighty passion, I’ll tyrannize him. As for you, say what you want. My lie, which calls your claim false, will outweigh your true claim."
"To whom should I complain? Did I tell this, That bear in them one and the self-same tongue, Either of condemnation or approof; Bidding the law make court’sy to their will: Hooking both right and wrong to the appetite, Though he hath fallen by prompture of the blood, Yet hath he in him such a mind of honour. That, had he twenty heads to tender down On twenty bloody blocks, he’ld yield them up, To such abhorr’d pollution. Then, Isabel, live chaste, and, brother, die: More than our brother is our chastity. I’ll tell him yet of Angelo’s request,","Who can I complain to? If I reported this, who would believe me? Oh, dangerous mouths, with double-talking tongues that can both condemn and approve, and make the law bow to their wishes. They put their sexual desires before notions of right and wrong! I’ll go to my brother. Although he gave in to his body’s demands, his mind’s so honorable that, if he had twenty heads to lay on twenty bloody execution blocks, he’d give them all up, rather than let his sister pollute her body. So, Isabel, you’ll live chaste, and brother, you’ll die. My chastity is more important than my brother. I’ll tell him of Angelo’s request, and prepare him for death—and the eternal rest of his soul."
So then you hope of pardon from Lord Angelo?,"So, you hope for a pardon from Lord Angelo?"
"The miserable have no other medicine But only hope: I’ve hope to live, and am prepared to die.","Hope is the only medicine miserable people have. I hope to live, and am prepared to die."
"Shall thereby be the sweeter. Reason thus with life: If I do lose thee, I do lose a thing That none but fools would keep: a breath thou art, Servile to all the skyey influences, Hourly afflict: merely, thou art death’s fool; For him thou labour’st by thy flight to shun And yet runn’st toward him still. Thou art not noble; For all the accommodations that thou bear’st For thou dost fear the soft and tender fork Of a poor worm. Thy best of rest is sleep, And that thou oft provokest; yet grossly fear’st Thy death, which is no more. Thou art not thyself; That issue out of dust. Happy thou art not; For what thou hast not, still thou strivest to get, And what thou hast, forget’st. Thou art not certain; For thy complexion shifts to strange effects, For, like an ass whose back with ingots bows, Thou bear’s thy heavy riches but a journey, And death unloads thee. Friend hast thou none; For thine own bowels, which do call thee sire, Do curse the gout, serpigo, and the rheum, For ending thee no sooner. Thou hast nor youth nor age, But, as it were, an after-dinner’s sleep, Dreaming on both; for all thy blessed youth Of palsied eld; and when thou art old and rich, Thou hast neither heat, affection, limb, nor beauty, To make thy riches pleasant. What’s yet in this That bears the name of life? Yet in this life That makes these odds all even.","Be ready to die; then either death or life will be all the sweeter. Tell life this: if I lose you, I lose something that only fools would want to keep. You’re just a breath, subject to all the changes of weather that hourly buffet the body you occupy. You’re simply death’s dupe, constantly struggling to run away from him, while all the while you’re running toward him. You’re not noble, because all your civilized comforts come from lowly plants and animals. You’re by no means brave, because the forked tongue of a little snake scares you. Sleep is your best way to rest, and you do that a lot, yet you stupidly fear death, which is basically the same thing. You’re not a single being, because you’re composed of thousands of grains of dust. You’re not happy, because you’re always trying to get what you don’t have, and what you do have, you forget about. You’re unstable, your moods changing as often as the phases of the moon. If you’re rich, you’re actually poor—like an ass staggering under a load of gold bars, you’re just carrying your heavy wealth for a period, and you lose that wealth when you die. You don’t have any friends, for even your children—the offspring of your own loins—curse the gout, skin rashes, and colds for not carrying you off sooner. You’re neither old or young, but always suspended in a sort of mid-afternoon nap, because when young, you’re like an old beggar, wheedling money from your feeble elders. And when you’re old and rich yourself, you have neither the passion, love, agility, or beauty to enjoy your wealth. So, what in all this is worth living for? Life hides more than a thousand deaths. Yet it’s death, which fixes all these problems, that we fear."
"I humbly thank you. To sue to live, I find I seek to die; And, seeking death, find life: let it come on.","I humbly thank you. In looking to live, I find I actually seek to die, and by seeking death, I find life. Let death come."
"[Within] What, ho! Peace here; grace and good company!","(offstage) Hello, there! Peace, grace, and good company to everyone here!"
Who’s there? come in: the wish deserves a welcome.,Who’s there? Come in. That wish deserves a welcome.
"Dear sir, ere long I’ll visit you again.","Dear sir, I’ll visit you again soon."
"Most holy sir, I thank you.","Most holy sir, thank you."
My business is a word or two with Claudio.,My business is a word or two with Claudio.
"And very welcome. Look, signior, here’s your sister.","And very welcome. Look, signor, here’s your sister."
"Provost, a word with you.","Provost, a word with you."
As many as you please.,As many as you please.
"Bring me to hear them speak, where I may be concealed.",Take me to a place where I can hide and overhear them.
"Now, sister, what’s the comfort?","Now, sister, what’s the good word?"
"As all comforts are; most good, most good indeed. Lord Angelo, having affairs to heaven, Intends you for his swift ambassador, Where you shall be an everlasting leiger: To-morrow you set on.","Why, as all good words are—very good indeed. Lord Angelo has business with heaven, and he’s going to make you his ambassador there—an eternal appointment. So get ready, quickly. Tomorrow you set off."
Is there no remedy?,Is there no way out?
"None, but such remedy as, to save a head, To cleave a heart in twain.","None, except a way that would save his head by breaking my heart in two."
But is there any?,But is there any?
"Yes, brother, you may live: There is a devilish mercy in the judge, If you’ll implore it, that will free your life, But fetter you till death.","Yes, brother, you can live. If you beg him, the judge will offer a devilish sort of mercy that will free you, yet chain you until death."
Perpetual durance?,Lifetime imprisonment?
"Ay, just; perpetual durance, a restraint, Though all the world’s vastidity you had, To a determined scope.","Yes, exactly. A type of lifetime imprisonment that would limit your movements, even if you had the freedom to roam the entire world."
But in what nature?,But what type?
"Would bark your honour from that trunk you bear, And leave you naked.","The type that, if you agreed to it, would strip your honor from your body like bark from a tree trunk, and leave you exposed to shame."
Let me know the point.,Get to the point.
"O, I do fear thee, Claudio; and I quake, And six or seven winters more respect Than a perpetual honour. Darest thou die? The sense of death is most in apprehension; And the poor beetle, that we tread upon, As when a giant dies.","Oh, I’m afraid of you, Claudio. I tremble to think you would cherish a wild existence and would value six or seven years of life more than everlasting honor. Do you dare to die? The worst part of death is anticipating it. A beetle we step on suffers as much as a giant when it dies."
"Why give you me this shame? Think you I can a resolution fetch From flowery tenderness? If I must die, And hug it in mine arms.","Why are you shaming me like this? Do you think I can summon my resolve from flowery, comforting speeches? If I have to die, I will meet the darkness like a bride, and hug it in my arms."
"There spake my brother; there my father’s grave Did utter forth a voice. Yes, thou must die: Thou art too noble to conserve a life Whose settled visage and deliberate word Nips youth i’ the head and follies doth emmew As falcon doth the fowl, is yet a devil His filth within being cast, he would appear","Now, that’s my brother talking—like my father speaking from his grave. Yes, you must die. You’re too noble to save yourself in a shameful way. This seemingly saintly deputy, whose composed face and carefully calculated words target and attack young people like some bird of prey, is really a devil. If you drained him of all the filth inside him, you’d reveal a pond as deep as hell."
The prenzie Angelo!,The “priestly” Angelo!
"O, ’tis the cunning livery of hell, The damned’st body to invest and cover In prenzie guards! Dost thou think, Claudio? Thou mightst be freed.","Oh, it’s a cunning disguise from hell, to cloak and cover the wickedest people in priestly clothes. Can you believe it, Claudio? If I gave him my virginity, you’d be freed."
O heavens! it cannot be.,"Oh, heavens! It can’t be."
"Yes, he would give’t thee, from this rank offence, So to offend him still. This night’s the time Or else thou diest to-morrow.","Yes, in exchange for this awful sin, he’d free you to keep on sinning. Tonight’s the time I have to do something I hate to even pronounce, or else you die tomorrow."
Thou shalt not do’t.,You mustn’t do it.
"O, were it but my life, I’ld throw it down for your deliverance","Oh, if it were just my life, I’d throw it away like a pin to save you."
"Thanks, dear Isabel.","Thanks, dear Isabel."
"Be ready, Claudio, for your death tomorrow.","Be ready, Claudio, for your death tomorrow."
"Yes. Has he affections in him, That thus can make him bite the law by the nose, Or of the deadly seven, it is the least.","Yes. Is his lust so great that it causes him to make a mockery of the law, even while he’s enforcing it? Of course, it isn’t a sin, or anyway it’s the least of the seven deadly sins."
Which is the least?,Which is the least?
"If it were damnable, he being so wise, Why would he for the momentary trick","If it were a damnable thing, why—if he’s so wise—would he risk being eternally punished for a momentary pleasure? Oh, Isabel!"
What says my brother?,What are you saying?
Death is a fearful thing.,Death is a fearful thing.
And shamed life a hateful.,And a disgraced life a hateful one.
"Ay, but to die, and go we know not where; This sensible warm motion to become A kneaded clod; and the delighted spirit To bathe in fiery floods, or to reside In thrilling region of thick-ribbed ice; And blown with restless violence round about The pendent world; or to be worse than worst Of those that lawless and incertain thought Imagine howling: ’tis too horrible! That age, ache, penury and imprisonment Can lay on nature is a paradise To what we fear of death.","Yes, but to die, and go who knows where. To lie cold and congealing, and to rot—this conscious, warm body to become a compact lump of earth, and the vast spirit to swim in hell’s fiery floods or reside in a frigid land of thick ice. To be confined inside invisible winds and perpetually, violently blown all around the world hanging in space. Or to be worse off than one of those tortured souls howling from punishment of sinful thoughts—it’s too horrible! The weariest, most hateful life that old age, aches, poverty and imprisonment can inflict on us is paradise compared to our fears of death."
"Alas, alas!","Oh, no!"
"What sin you do to save a brother’s life, Nature dispenses with the deed so far That it becomes a virtue.","Sweet sister, let me live. Any sin you commit to save a brother’s life, nature will pardon as though it were a good deed."
"O you beast! Wilt thou be made a man out of my vice? Is’t not a kind of incest, to take life From thine own sister’s shame? What should I think? Heaven shield my mother play’d my father fair! Ne’er issued from his blood. Take my defiance! Die, perish! Might but my bending down Reprieve thee from thy fate, it should proceed: I’ll pray a thousand prayers for thy death,","Oh, you beast! Treacherous coward! Shameful wretch! Will you be given your life as a result of my vice? Isn’t it a kind of incest, to gain life from your own sister’s shame? What should I think? God forbid, my mother must have cheated on my father, for such a twisted son as you never could have sprung from his blood! I renounce you—die, perish! Even if all I had to do was pray on bended knees to stop your execution, I’d let it happen. I’ll pray a thousand prayers for your death, and not one word to save you."
"Nay, hear me, Isabel.","No, listen to me, Isabel."
"O, fie, fie, fie! Thy sin’s not accidental, but a trade. Mercy to thee would prove itself a bawd:","Oh, shame, shame, shame! Your sin was no one-time accident, but a habit. Granting you mercy would be like pimping, enabling you to do it again. It’s best that you die right away."
"O hear me, Isabella!","Oh, listen to me, Isabella!"
"Vouchsafe a word, young sister, but one word.","Permit me to say a word, young sister, just one word."
What is your will?,What do you want?
"Might you dispense with your leisure, I would by and would require is likewise your own benefit.","If you can spare the time, I’d like to talk with you in a little while. You’d be doing yourself a favor as well as me."
I have no superfluous leisure; my stay must be stolen out of other affairs; but I will attend you awhile.,"I don’t have any spare time, but I’ll wait for you a little while."
"Son, I have overheard what hath passed between you corrupt her; only he hath made an essay of her virtue to practise his judgment with the disposition of natures: she, having the truth of honour in her, hath made him that gracious denial which he is most know this to be true; therefore prepare yourself to death: do not satisfy your resolution with hopes that are fallible: tomorrow you must die; go to your knees and make ready.","Son, I overheard what happened between you and your sister. Angelo never meant to seduce her. He was only testing her virtue, to test his ability to judge character. Being a person of integrity, she virtuously refused him, and he was happy to hear it. I’m Angelo’s confessor, so I know this is true. Therefore, prepare yourself for death. Don’t prop yourself up with false hopes. Tomorrow you must die. Fall to your knees and prepare for confession."
with life that I will sue to be rid of it.,Let me ask my sister to forgive me. I’m so out of love with life that I’ll pray to be rid of it.
Hold you there: farewell.,Maintain that attitude. Farewell.
"Provost, a word with you!","Provost, a word with you!"
"What’s your will, father[?]","What is it, father?"
awhile with the maid: my mind promises with my habit no loss shall touch her by my company.,"Now that you’ve come over, you should go away. Leave me with the girl awhile. My intentions and the fact that I’m a friar guarantee that nothing bad will happen to her."
In good time.,Very well.
"The hand that hath made you fair hath made you good: brief in goodness; but grace, being the soul of your complexion, shall keep the body of it ever fair. The assault that Angelo hath made to you, fortune hath conveyed to my understanding; and, but wonder at Angelo. How will you do to content this substitute, and to save your brother?","He who made you lovely made you good, as well. Beauty has a cheap kind of goodness, which is why beauty doesn’t last. But virtue lies at the heart of your character, so you will always be beautiful. I’ve heard about Angelo’s sexual advances to you, and if there weren’t other examples of such lapses, I’d be really surprised. What are you going to do to satisfy this stand-in and save your brother?"
"I am now going to resolve him: I had rather my brother die by the law than my son should be deceived in Angelo! If ever he return and I can speak to him, I will open my lips in vain, or discover his government.","I’m going now to give him my answer: I’d rather my brother die by legitimate execution than have an illegitimate baby. But, oh, how wrong the good duke was about Angelo! If he ever returns and I can speak to him, the first words I speak will be to expose Angelo’s way of governing."
"That shall not be much ami Yet, as the matter trial of you only. Therefore fasten your ear on my advisings: to the love I have in doing good a remedy presents itself. I do make myself believe that you may most uprighteously do a poor wronged the angry law; do no stain to your own gracious person; and much please the absent duke, if peradventure he shall ever return to have hearing of this business.","That’s not a bad idea. But, as the matter now stands, he’ll deny your accusation. He’ll say he was only testing you. So, listen to my advice. My delight in doing good gives me an idea for a solution. I’m convinced there’s a way you righteously can do a poor wronged lady some well-deserved good, save your brother from the cruel law, keep your own gracious self pure, and greatly please the absent duke, if he ever returns to hear about all this."
anything that appears not foul in the truth of my spirit.,"Tell me more. I have the courage to do anything, as long as it doesn’t strike me as wrong."
"Virtue is bold, and goodness never fearful. Have you not heard speak of Mariana, the sister of Frederick the great soldier who miscarried at sea?","Virtue is bold, and goodness is never afraid. Have you ever heard of Mariana, the sister of Frederick, the great soldier who died at sea?"
"I have heard of the lady, and good words went with her name.","I’ve heard of the lady, and people always spoke well of her."
"She should this Angelo have married; was affianced to her by oath, and the nuptial appointed: between which time of the contract and limit of the solemnity, her brother Frederick was wrecked at sea, sister. But mark how heavily this befell to the poor gentlewoman: there she lost a noble and renowned brother, in his love toward her ever most kind and natural; with him, the portion and sinew of combinate husband, this well-seeming Angelo.","She was supposed to marry this Angelo. They were engaged, and the wedding day was set. But before the ceremony, her brother Frederick was lost at sea, in the ship that was carrying his sister’s dowry. The poor woman suffered a heavy blow. She lost a famous, noble brother, who loved her dearly and devotedly. She lost with him her dowry, the bulk of her fortune, and with both, she lost her husband-to-be, this oh-so-respectable Angelo."
Can this be so? did Angelo so leave her?,Can this be true? Did Angelo leave her?
"Left her in her tears, and dried not one of them with his comfort; swallowed his vows whole, bestowed her on her own lamentation, which she yet wears for his sake; and he, a marble to her tears, is washed with them, but relents not.","Left her in her tears, without drying a single one of them. He reneged on his vows completely, saying he discovered that she’d been unfaithful to him. He gave her only grief, basically, and she still wears it, like a wedding dress. Her tears wash over him, but like a marble statue, he never budges."
What a merit were it in death to take this poor maid it will let this man live! But how out of this can she avail?,"It’s the equivalent of a death to take this poor girl away from the world! And life is so unfair, that this man lives! But how can she benefit from all this?"
"It is a rupture that you may easily heal: and the cure of it not only saves your brother, but keeps you from dishonour in doing it.","It’s a break that you can easily heal, and the cure not only saves your brother, but keeps you from dishonor."
"Show me how, good father.","Show me how, good father."
"This forenamed maid hath yet in her the continuance of her first affection: his unjust unkindness, that in all reason should have quenched her love, hath, like an impediment in the current, made it more requiring with a plausible obedience; agree with his demands to the point; only refer yourself to this advantage, first, that your stay with him may not be long; that the time may have all shadow and This being granted in course,—and now follows all,—we shall advise this wronged maid to stead up your appointment, go in your place; if the encounter acknowledge itself hereafter, it may compel him to saved, your honour untainted, the poor Mariana advantaged, and the corrupt deputy scaled. The maid will I frame and make fit for his attempt. If you think well to carry this as you may, the doubleness What think you of it?","This maid still loves Angelo. Logically, his unfair cruelty should have ended her love, but it’s actually intensified it, the way water becomes violent and choppy when it hits a barrier. Go to Angelo. Pretend to yield to his request, and obey his demands to the letter. But set some conditions: that you not spend much time together, that it be in the dark, that there be absolute silence, and that it be in a convenient place. When he agrees—and now here’s the key part—we’ll tell the wronged girl to go in your place. If their encounter later comes to light, it might compel him to compensate her. The result of all this: your brother is saved, your honor is maintained, poor Mariana is helped, and the corrupt deputy is punished. I’ll prepare the girl and make her ready for the encounter. If you think you can manage this, the double benefit outweighs any blame for the deception. What do you think?"
The image of it gives me content already; and I trust it will grow to a most prosperous perfection.,"I like the idea already, and I hope it’ll be successful."
"It lies much in your holding up. Haste you speedily bed, give him promise of satisfaction. I will presently to Saint Luke’s: there, at the moated grange, resides this dejected Mariana. At that place call upon me; and dispatch with Angelo, that","A lot depends on your ability to pull it off. Hurry over to Angelo. If he begs you to sleep with him tonight, promise to satisfy him. I’ll go to Saint Luke’s; poor Mariana is living there, in a country house. Arrange things with Angelo and come see me there, the sooner the better."
"I thank you for this comfort. Fare you well, good father.","Thank you for your help. Goodbye, good father."
"Nay, if there be no remedy for it, but that you will needs buy and sell men and women like beasts, we shall have all the world drink brown and white bastard a pun referring both to types of sweet Spanish wines and to illegitimate children brown and white bastard .","No, but if you go on buying and selling men and women like beasts, everyone in the world will end up spawning bastards."
O heavens! what stuff is here,"Oh, heavens! What nonsense is this?"
"merriest was put down, and the worser allowed by order of law a furred gown to keep him warm; and furred with fox and lamb-skins too, to signify, that craft, being richer than innocency, stands for the facing.","Life’s become a lot less fun since the law took two crimes—prostitution and moneylending—and suppressed the one that was the most fun, while condoning the worse of the two. The thriving moneylender wraps himself in a warm fur coat, made of skins from the innocent lamb and trimmed in fur from the crafty fox, proving that craftiness is worth more than innocence."
"Come your way, sir. ’Bless you, good father friar.","Come along, sir. Bless you, good father friar this greeting makes no sense since friar means brother, hence the Duke’s mocking response father friar ."
"And you, good brother father. What offence hath this man made you, sir?","And you, good brother father. How has this man offended you, sir?"
"Marry, sir, he hath offended the law: and, sir, we take him to be a thief too, sir; for we have found sent to the deputy.","Actually, sir, he has offended the law. And, sir, we take him to be a thief too, sir, because we found on him, sir, a strange device for picking locks presumably for picking the locks on chastity belts picking locks , which we have sent to the deputy."
"Fie, sirrah! a bawd, a wicked bawd! The evil that thou causest to be done, That is thy means to live. Do thou but think From such a filthy vice: say to thyself, From their abominable and beastly touches I drink, I eat, array myself, and live. Canst thou believe thy living is a life,","(to POMPEY) Shame, sirrah a title used to address a male inferior sirrah ! A pimp, a wicked pimp! You support yourself by doing evil. Do you ever stop to think what it is to stuff your mouth or clothe your back from such a filthy vice? Say to yourself, I eat, dress myself, and live off abominable, beastly sex. Can you believe your way of life is a life, when it’s dependent on such stinking acts? Change your ways, change your ways."
"Indeed, it does stink in some sort, sir; but yet, sir, I would prove—","Yes, it does stink in a way, sir; but, sir, I would prove—"
"Nay, if the devil have given thee proofs for sin, Thou wilt prove his. Take him to prison, officer: Ere this rude beast will profit.","No, if the devil has given you excuses for sin, you’ll prove only that you belong to him. Take him to prison, officer. Punishment and religion must both be used on this crude beast before he improves."
"He must before the deputy, sir; he has given him warning: the deputy cannot abide a whoremaster: if he be a whoremonger, and comes before him, he were","He has to appear before the deputy, sir, who’s already given him a warning. The deputy can’t stand pimps, and if he is a pimp, and appears before him, he would be better off being anywhere but there."
"That we were all, as some would seem to be, From our faults, as faults from seeming, free!",If only we were all—as some of us seem to be—as free from sin as this pimp is from hypocrisy!
"His neck will come to your waist’—a cord, sir.","Like your waist friars’ robes were tied at the waist with a belt made of rope or cord Like your waist , his neck will soon have a rope around it, sir."
I spy comfort; I cry bail. Here’s a gentleman and a,I see help coming—and bail. Here’s a gentleman and a friend of mine.
"How now, noble Pompey! What, at the wheels of Caesar? art thou led in triumph? What, is there none of Pygmalion’s images, newly made woman, to be had now, for putting the hand in the pocket and sayest thou to this tune, matter and method? Is’t not drowned i’ the last rain, ha? What sayest thou, Trot? Is the world as it was, man? Which is the way? Is it sad, and few words? or how? The","Hey there, noble Pompey! Oh dear, are you being paraded like a prisoner-of-war after the victorious Caesar’s chariot? What, aren’t there any more girls just turned women who can be had for a handful of dollars? Ha, don’t you have any answers? How do you feel about the new regime? Puts quite a damper on things, right? What do you say, old man? Hasn’t the world changed? What’s your mood nowadays, a bit sad and silent? Or how? What’s the plan?"
"Still thus, and thus; still worse!",This is getting worse and worse.
"How doth my dear morsel, thy mistress? Procures she still, ha?","How’s my sweetheart, your boss-lady? Is she still a madam?"
"Troth, sir, she hath eaten up all her beef, and she is herself in the tub “beef” can mean actual meat or prostitutes; “tub” can mean a pickling tub for curing meat, or a sweat-tub to treat venereal disease. she hath eaten up all her beef, and she is herself in the tub .","Truthfully, sir, she’s worn out all her prostitutes, and is herself getting treated for an STD."
"so: ever your fresh whore and your powdered bawd: an unshunned consequence; it must be so. Art going to prison, Pompey?","That’s right, that’s the way it goes: your fresh-faced whore ages into a heavily made-up madam. It’s unavoidable. Are you going to prison, Pompey?"
"Yes, faith, sir.","I am indeed, sir."
"sent thee thither. For debt, Pompey? or how?","Not a bad thing, Pompey. Goodbye. Go and say I sent you. For debt, Pompey? Or something else?"
"For being a bawd, for being a bawd.","For being a pimp, for being a pimp."
"Well, then, imprison him: if imprisonment be the due of a bawd, why, ’tis his right: bawd is he Farewell, good Pompey. Commend me to the prison, Pompey: you will turn good husband now, Pompey; you will keep the house.","Well, then, put him in jail: if imprisonment is the punishment for being a pimp, then he deserves it. He’s undoubtedly a pimp, and has been for a long time. Born a pimp. Goodbye, good Pompey. Give my regards to prison. You’ll be a good husband now, Pompey—you’ll never leave home."
"I hope, sir, your good worship will be my bail.","I hope, sir, you’ll post bail for me."
"I will pray, Pompey, to increase your bondage: If you take it not patiently, why, your mettle is the more. Adieu, trusty Pompey. ’Bless you, friar.","No, I won’t, Pompey. It’s not in style now. I will pray, Pompey, to increase your sentence. Show an iron will while you’re in iron chains. Adieu French for “goodbye” Adieu , Pompey. God bless you, friar."
And you.,And you.
"Does Bridget paint still, Pompey, ha?","Does Bridget still get dolled up, Pompey, ha?"
"Come your ways, sir; come.","Come along, sir, come."
"You will not bail me, then, sir?","You won’t bail me out, then, sir?"
"Then, Pompey, nor now. What news abroad, friar? what news?","Neither then, Pompey, nor now. What’s happening, friar? What’s the news?"
"Come your ways, sir; come.","Come along, sir, come."
"Go to kennel, Pompey; go.","Off to the doghouse, Pompey. Go."
"What news, friar, of the duke?","Any news, friar, of the duke?"
I know none. Can you tell me of any?,I don’t know anything. Can you tell me any news?
Some say he is with the Emperor of Russia; other,Some say he’s with the emperor of Russia. Others say that he’s in Rome. Where do you think he is?
"I know not where; but wheresoever, I wish him well.","I don’t know, but wherever he is, I wish him well."
"It was a mad fantastical trick of him to steal from the state, and usurp the beggary he was never born to. Lord Angelo dukes it well in his absence; he",It was a crazy whim of his to sneak away from the city and pretend to be the commoner he was never born to be. Lord Angelo runs things well in his absence—he’s hard on criminals.
He does well in ’t.,He does a good job of it.
"A little more lenity to lechery would do no harm in him: something too crabbed that way, friar.","It wouldn’t hurt him to go a little easier on sex. There’s something too harsh in the way he’s handling that, friar."
"It is too general a vice, and severity must cure it.",It is too widespread a vice. It needs a severe cure.
"it is well allied: but it is impossible to extirp it quite, friar, till eating and drinking be put down. They say this Angelo was not made by man and woman after this downright way of creation: is it","Yes, to tell the truth, this is a vice a lot of people practice. But it’s impossible to stamp it out totally, friar. You’d have to stop people eating and drinking first. They say this Angelo wasn’t the result of a normal act between a man and woman. Do you think that’s true?"
"How should he be made, then?","What was he the result of, then?"
"Some report a sea-maid spawned him; some, that he was begot between two stock-fishes. But it is certain that when he makes water his urine is motion generative; that’s infallible.","Some say a mermaid gave birth to him, some that he was conceived by two dried codfish. But it’s a fact that when he pees, his urine is congealed ice. That I know to be true. And he’s an impotent puppet—that’s certain."
"You are pleasant, sir, and speak apace.","You’re a funny guy, sir, and speak freely."
"Why, what a ruthless thing is this in him, for the rebellion of a codpiece to take away the life of a Ere he would have hanged a man for the getting a hundred bastards, he would have paid for the nursing a thousand: he had some feeling of the sport: he knew the service, and that instructed him to mercy.","Well, what a cruel thing for him to do, to take a man’s life because his penis rose up! Would the absent duke have done something like this? Before he would’ve hanged a man for fathering a hundred bastards, he would’ve paid for nursing a thousand. He had some understanding of prostitution. He knew the game, and that made him merciful."
women; he was not inclined that way.,I never heard the absent duke accused of womanizing. He wasn’t inclined that way.
"O, sir, you are deceived.","Oh, sir, you’re wrong."
’Tis not possible.,That’s not possible.
"Who, not the duke? yes, your beggar of fifty; and duke had crotchets in him. He would be drunk too; that let me inform you.","Who, the duke? Yes, your fifty-year-old beggar-woman—he’d habitually make a deposit in her dish. The duke was a little kinky. He’d get drunk, too, let me tell you."
"You do him wrong, surely.","Surely, you’re being unfair to him."
"Sir, I was an inward of his. A shy fellow was the withdrawing.","Sir, I was a close friend of his. The duke was a shy fellow, and I believe I know the reason for his sudden departure."
"What, I prithee, might be the cause?","What, please tell me, was the reason?"
"No, pardon; ’tis a secret must be locked within the teeth and the lips: but this I can let you duke to be wise.","No, sorry. It’s a secret that must stay locked in my mouth. But this I can tell you: the majority of his subjects thought the duke a wise man."
"Wise! why, no question but he was.","Wise! Well, there’s no doubt that he was."
"A very superficial, ignorant, unweighing fellow.","A very superficial, ignorant, thoughtless fellow."
"Either this is the envy in you, folly, or mistaking: helmed must upon a warranted need give him a better proclamation. Let him be but testimonied in his own bringings-forth, and he shall appear to the envious a scholar, a statesman and a soldier. knowledge be more it is much darkened in your malice.","You’re either jealous, mad, or mistaken. The way he conducts his life and his role as a ruler by themselves must earn him a better reputation. Judge him by his public actions and even the envious would see him as a scholar, a statesman, and a soldier. So, you don’t know what you’re talking about. Or, if you do, you’re spitefully trying to tarnish his name."
"Sir, I know him, and I love him.","Sir, I know him, and I love him."
"Love talks with better knowledge, and knowledge with dearer love.","If you loved him you would know him better, and if you knew him better you would love him more."
"Come, sir, I know what I know.","Look, sir, I know what I know."
"I can hardly believe that, since you know not what you speak. But, if ever the duke return, as our prayers are he may, let me desire you to make your answer before him. If it be honest you have spoke, upon you; and, I pray you, your name?","I can hardly believe that, since you don’t know what you’re talking about. But, if the duke ever returns, as we pray he will, I challenge you to justify your comments in front of him. If you’ve spoken the truth, you should have the courage to defend it. It’s my duty to summon you to testify. May I ask your name?"
"Sir, my name is Lucio; well known to the duke.","Sir, my name is Lucio, and it’s well known to the duke."
"He shall know you better, sir, if I may live to report you.","He’ll know you even better, sir, if I live to report you."
I fear you not.,I’m not afraid of you.
"O, you hope the duke will return no more; or you imagine me too unhurtful an opposite. But indeed I can do you little harm; you’ll forswear this again.","Oh, you hope the duke will never come back, or you think I’m too weak an enemy. But I really can do you a little harm—you’ll end up denying this."
"I’ll be hanged first: thou art deceived in me, Claudio die to-morrow or no?","I’ll be hanged first. You’re wrong about me, friar. But forget all this. Can you tell me if Claudio is to die tomorrow or not?"
"Why should he die, sir?","Why should he die, sir?"
"Why? For filling a bottle with a tundish. I would the duke we talk of were returned again: the continency; sparrows must not build in his house-eaves, because they are lecherous. The duke yet would have dark deeds darkly answered; he would never bring them to light: would he were returned! Farewell, good friar: I prithee, pray for me. The duke, I say to thee again, would eat mutton on Fridays. He’s not past it yet, and I say to thee, he would mouth with a beggar, though she smelt brown","Why? For plugging a hole. I wish the duke were back again. His sexless deputy’s abstinence policy will depopulate the province. Even sparrows can’t nest on his roof, because they’re lecherous sparrows were considered sacred to Venus, Goddess of Love, and thus symbols of sex because they’re lecherous ! The duke would have punished sexual acts privately—he’d never publicly expose them. I wish he were back! Claudio is condemned for getting undressed. Goodbye, good friar. Please pray for me. I tell you again, the duke was no choir boy— he would eat mutton on Fridays a pun, referring both to eating meat (mutton) on Fridays—forbidden to Catholics—and to visiting prostitutes, called mutton in Elizabethan slang he would eat mutton on Fridays . He’s not past it yet, and I tell you, he’d French-kiss a beggar, even if she smelled of moldy bread and garlic. Say that I said so. Goodbye."
No might nor greatness in mortality Can censure ’scape; back-wounding calumny The whitest virtue strikes. What king so strong Can tie the gall up in the slanderous tongue?,Neither political power nor noble character can escape criticism; even the most virtuous person can be stabbed in the back by slurs. What king is so strong he can bottle up the poison of a slandering tongue? But who’s coming now?
Go; away with her to prison!,"Go on, take her to prison!"
"Good my lord, be good to me; your honour is accounted a merciful man; good my lord.","My good lord, be good to me. Your honor is said to be that of a merciful man, my good lord."
"Double and treble admonition, and still forfeit in the tyrant.","You’ve been warned two, three times, and you’re still committing the same crime! This is enough to turn mercy itself into a cursing tyrant."
"A bawd of eleven years’ continuance, may it please your honour.","A madam for eleven years, your honor."
"My lord, this is one Lucio’s information against me. duke’s time; he promised her marriage: his child is a year and a quarter old, come Philip and Jacob: I have kept it myself; and see how he goes about to abuse me!","My lord, this is Lucio’s accusation against me. He got Miss Kate Keepdown pregnant, back in the days when the duke was still here, and he promised to marry her. Now his child will be fifteen months old on May Day. I kept the kid myself, and now see how he goes out of his way to abuse me!"
That fellow is a fellow of much licence: let him be no more words.,That fellow is a dangerous fellow. Bring him before me. Take her away to prison! No more talking.
"Provost, my brother Angelo will not be altered; Claudio must die to-morrow: let him be furnished with divines, and have all charitable preparation. so with him.","Provost, my colleague Angelo won’t change his mind—Claudio must die tomorrow. Furnish him with priests, to give him spiritual consolation. If my colleague possessed my sense of pity, this wouldn’t be happening."
"So please you, this friar hath been with him, and advised him for the entertainment of death.","This friar’s been with him, and helped him prepare for death."
"Good even, good father.","Good evening, good father."
Bliss and goodness on you!,Bliss and goodness to you!
Of whence are you?,Where are you from?
"Not of this country, though my chance is now To use it for my time: I am a brother Of gracious order, late come from the See","Not from this country, though I happen to be here for the time being. I belong to a holy brotherhood, and have just come from Rome, on special business from the Vatican."
What news abroad i’ the world?,What’s the news from abroad?
"None, but that there is so great a fever on goodness, that the dissolution of it must cure it: novelty is only in request; and it is as dangerous to be inconstant in any undertaking. There is scarce truth enough alive to make societies secure; but security enough to make fellowships accurst: much upon this riddle runs the wisdom of the world. This pray you, sir, of what disposition was the duke?","None, except that goodness is so sick that only death can cure it. People only want the latest thing, and it’s as dangerous to be faithful as it is virtuous to be promiscuous. There’s barely enough honesty left for it to be safe to get involved with people, but there’s enough blind trust to doom partnerships. The wisdom of the world runs on paradoxes like this. It’s old news, but everyday news. Tell me, sir, what sort of man was the duke?"
"One that, above all other strifes, contended especially to know himself.","Someone who, above everything else, truly wanted to know himself."
What pleasure was he given to?,What sort of things did he enjoy?
"any thing which professed to make him rejoice: a gentleman of all temperance. But leave we him to his events, with a prayer they may prove prosperous; and let me desire to know how you find Claudio lent him visitation.","He enjoyed seeing someone else happy more than doing something that made himself happy—an even-tempered man. But let’s leave him to his affairs, with a prayer that they’ll be prosperous, and tell me how Claudio is. I understand you’ve visited him."
"He professes to have received no sinister measure from his judge, but most willingly humbles himself to the determination of justice: yet had he framed deceiving promises of life; which I by my good leisure have discredited to him, and now is he resolved to die.","He claims to have received no unfair treatment from his judge, but willingly yields to the law’s verdict. Out of human weakness, he’d formed many deceptive hopes about a reprieve. But gradually I showed him these made no sense, and now he is ready to die."
"You have paid the heavens your function, and the laboured for the poor gentleman to the extremest shore of my modesty: but my brother justice have I found so severe, that he hath forced me to tell him he is indeed Justice.","You have fulfilled your duty to both God and the prisoner. I pleaded for the poor man as much as I could, without giving offense, but my fellow judge is so severe, I swear, he’s like Justice itself."
"proceeding, it shall become him well; wherein if he chance to fail, he hath sentenced himself.","If his own behavior matches the strictness of his judgments, it’s to his credit. But if he slips, he’s written his own sentence."
I am going to visit the prisoner. Fare you well.,I’m going to visit the prisoner. Goodbye.
Peace be with you!,Peace be with you!
"Should be as holy as severe; Pattern in himself to know, Grace to stand, and virtue go; More nor less to others paying Shame to him whose cruel striking Kills for faults of his own liking! Twice treble shame on Angelo, To weed my vice and let his grow! Though angel on the outward side! How may likeness made in crimes, Making practise on the times, To draw with idle spiders’ strings Craft against vice I must apply: With Angelo to-night shall lie His old betrothed but despised; So disguise shall, by the disguised, And perform an old contracting.","(to himself) He who wants to be a ruler and enact heaven’s justice should be as holy as he is severe. He should find in himself a model of proper conduct, the grace to stand firm, and the strength to go forward, punishing others no more or less than he’d punish his own sins. Shame on him who cruelly strikes and kills others for the very faults he possesses! Shame on Angelo six times over, for weeding out my vice while nurturing his own! Oh, what evil an angelic-looking man can hide in himself! How this seemingly virtuous behavior, born out of sin, can deceive everyone! It’s like a spider web that traps small sins like small insects, but breaks when anything large and heavy touches it. I must combat vice with cunning. Tonight Angelo will sleep with his rejected, former fiancée. By deceit, the deceiver will be forced to pay for his wrongful demands, and fulfill his old contract."
"(sings) Take, O, take those lips away, That so sweetly were forsworn; And those eyes, the break of day, Lights that do mislead the morn: Seals of love, but sealed in vain, sealed in vain.","(singing) Take, oh take those lips away, that swore such sweet lies, and those eyes, which trick the morning by shining bright as the sun at dawn. But give back, give back my kisses, which seal my love, but seal it in vain, seal it in vain."
"Break off thy song, and haste thee quick away: Here comes a man of comfort, whose advice Hath often still’d my brawling discontent.","Stop singing, and leave, quickly. Here comes a man whose advice has often calmed me down."
"You had not found me here so musical: Let me excuse me, and believe me so, My mirth it much displeased, but pleased my woe.","I beg your pardon, sir. I wish you hadn’t found me listening to music. Please excuse me, and believe me, it drove away my joy and nurtured my sorrow."
"’Tis good; though music oft hath such a charm I pray, you, tell me, hath any body inquired for me here to-day? much upon this time have I promised here to meet.","That’s good, though music often has a magical power to make the bad seem good and encourage good people to misbehave. Please tell me, has anybody been asking for me here today? I promised to meet someone here about this time."
You have not been inquired after:,No one’s been asking for you. I’ve been sitting here all day.
"I do constantly believe you. The time is come even now. I shall crave your forbearance a little: may be I will call upon you anon, for some advantage to yourself.","I believe you; she’s here now. May I ask you to leave for a little while? I’ll be with you shortly, and it’ll be to your advantage."
I am always bound to you.,I’m always grateful to you.
What is the news from this good deputy?,Welcome—and perfect timing. What’s the news from our favorite deputy?
"He hath a garden circummured with brick, Whose western side is with a vineyard back’d; And to that vineyard is a planched gate, This other doth command a little door Which from the vineyard to the garden leads; There have I made my promise Upon the heavy middle of the night","He has a garden surrounded by a brick wall, whose western side is backed by a vineyard. Leading to that vineyard is a gate of wooden planks that you open with this larger key. This other key opens a little door that leads from the vineyard to the garden. I’ve promised to meet him there, in the dark middle of the night."
But shall you on your knowledge find this way?,But do you know how to find the way there?
"I have ta’en a due and wary note upon’t: With whispering and most guilty diligence, In action all of precept, he did show me","I’ve noted it carefully—he gave me the directions twice, whispering the details with care and using gestures to explain."
Are there no other tokens Between you ’greed concerning her observance?,Are there any other agreed-on signals she has to give?
"No, none, but only a repair i’ the dark; And that I have possess’d him my most stay I have a servant comes with me along, That stays upon me, whose persuasion is I come about my brother.","No, none, only a visit in the dark. And I’ve let him know I can only stay a short time, because I told him a servant would be waiting for me, under the pretense that I was coming about my brother."
"’Tis well borne up. A word of this. What, ho! within! come forth!","You’ve handled it well. I haven’t told Mariana a word of this yet. Hey, you in there! Come here!"
"I pray you, be acquainted with this maid; She comes to do you good.","(to MARIANA) Please, let me introduce you to this girl. She’s here to help you."
I do desire the like.,That’s what I want to do.
Do you persuade yourself that I respect you?,Do you believe that I’ve got your best interests at heart?
"Good friar, I know you do, and have found it.","Good friar, I know you do, and that you’ve found a way to help."
"Take, then, this your companion by the hand, Who hath a story ready for your ear. I shall attend your leisure: but make haste;","Then take the hand of your new friend, who has a tale to tell you. I’ll wait for you until you’re ready, but hurry— night’s falling."
Will’t please you walk aside?,Will you walk with me?
O place and greatness! millions of false eyes Are stuck upon thee: volumes of report Run with these false and most contrarious quests Make thee the father of their idle dreams And rack thee in their fancies.,"Oh, you people of high rank! Millions of treacherous eyes are fixed on you, accompanied by a mass of hostile rumors that follow everything you do. A thousand imaginations make you the source of their silly fantasies and torture you with their delusions."
"Welcome, how agreed?",Welcome back. What did you decide?
"She’ll take the enterprise upon her, father,","She’ll do it, father, if you recommend it."
"It is not my consent, But my entreaty too.",I don’t just recommend it. I beg her to do it.
"Little have you to say When you depart from him, but, soft and low,","When you leave him, all you have to do is say softly, “Now remember my brother.”"
Fear me not.,Don’t worry about me.
"Nor, gentle daughter, fear you not at all. He is your husband on a pre-contract: To bring you thus together, ’tis no sin, Doth flourish the deceit. Come, let us go: Our corn’s to reap, for yet our tithe’s to sow.","And, gentle daughter, don’t worry for yourself. He is your husband-to-be, so it’s no sin for you two to sleep together—your valid claim as his wife allows the deception. Come on, let’s go. We have to sow the seeds before we can reap the harvest."
"Come hither, sirrah. Can you cut off a man’s head?","Come here, you. Can you cut off a man’s head?"
"If the man be a bachelor, sir, I can; but if he be a married man, he’s his wife’s head a pun, referring both to the Biblical idea of the husband as the head of the wife (Ephesians : ) and the husband owning his wife’s maidenhead (virginity) wife’s head , and I can never cut off a woman’s head.","If the man’s a bachelor, sir, I can. But if he’s a married man, he’s also his wife’s head, and I can never cut off a woman’s head."
"direct answer. To-morrow morning are to die Claudio and Barnardine. Here is in our prison a common executioner, who in his office lacks a helper: if you will take it on you to assist him, it shall your full time of imprisonment and your deliverance with an unpitied whipping, for you have been a notorious bawd.","Come on, sir, spare me your jokes and give me a straight answer. Claudio and Barnardine are to die tomorrow morning. Here in our prison we have a public executioner, who needs a helper. If you’ll take on the job of assisting him, it’ll free you from your chains. If you don’t, you’ll have to serve your full sentence, with a fierce whipping before you’re released because you’ve been a notorious pimp."
"Sir, I have been an unlawful bawd time out of mind; would be glad to receive some instruction from my fellow partner.","Sir, I’ve been an illegal pimp for longer than I can remember, but I’ll be happy to be a legal hangman. I’d be glad for my new partner to teach me."
"What, ho! Abhorson! Where’s Abhorson, there?","Hey, Abhorson the name combines the words “abhor” and “whoreson” (son of a whore) Abhorson ! Where are you, Abhorson? ABHORSON (the executioner) enters."
"Do you call, sir?","Did you call, sir?"
"your execution. If you think it meet, compound with him by the year, and let him abide here with you; if not, use him for the present and dismiss him. He cannot plead his estimation with you; he hath been a bawd.","Here’s a fellow to help you with tomorrow’s executions. If he works out, settle on an annual salary and let him stay here with you. If he doesn’t, use him just for now and then fire him. He can’t claim to be too good for the work since he’s been a pimp."
"A bawd, sir? fie upon him! he will discredit our mystery.","A pimp, sir? To hell with him! He’ll discredit our profession."
"Go to, sir; you weigh equally; a feather will turn the scale.","Go on, sir. You two are worth the same. No more than a featherweight’s difference, anyway."
"Pray, sir, by your good favour,—for surely, sir, a good favour you have, but that you have a hanging","Sir, would you please—for you do have a pleasing face, except for your hanging expression—tell me if you call your job a profession?"
"Ay, sir; a mystery","Yes, sir, a profession."
"Painting, sir, I have heard say, is a mystery; and your whores, sir, being members of my occupation, using painting, do prove my occupation a mystery: should be hanged, I cannot imagine.","I’ve heard it said that painting, sir, is a profession, and since whores—who are in my field—paint their faces, they prove my occupation is a profession. But I’ll be hanged if I can imagine how hanging is a profession."
"Sir, it is a mystery.","Sir, it is a profession."
Proof?,Can you prove it?
"Every true man’s apparel fits your thief: if it be big enough; if it be too big for your thief, your thief thinks it little enough: so every true man’s apparel fits your thief.","A thief steals and puts on the clothes of an honest man. If the thief thinks the clothes don’t make him seem honest enough, a truly honest man will think that’s appropriate. If the thief thinks the clothes make him seem extra honest, then the thief thinks the disguise fits just right. So someone is always happy with the way the disguise works for the thief."
Are you agreed?,Have you reached an agreement?
a more penitent trade than your bawd; he doth oftener ask forgiveness.,"Sir, I’ll work for him, because I think a hangman’s job is a sorrier one than a pimp’s— he asks forgiveness more often an executioner traditionally asked the condemned person to forgive him just before the execution he asks forgiveness more often ."
"You, sirrah, provide your block and your axe to-morrow four o’clock.","You, fellow, have your block and your axe ready tomorrow at four o’clock."
"Come on, bawd; I will instruct thee in my trade; follow.","Come on, pimp, I’ll show you the ropes. Follow me."
"I do desire to learn, sir: and I hope, if you have occasion to use me for your own turn, you shall find me yare; for truly, sir, for your kindness I owe you a good turn.","I want to learn, sir. And I hope, if you ever get the chance to use me for your own execution, you’ll find me ready. Because, really, I owe you a good turn for your kindness."
"The one has my pity; not a jot the other, Being a murderer, though he were my brother.","Call Barnardine and Claudio here. I pity one, but not the other, even if he were my brother, as he’s a murderer."
"Look, here’s the warrant, Claudio, for thy death: ’Tis now dead midnight, and by eight to-morrow","Look, Claudio, here’s your death warrant. It’s now dead midnight, and by a.m. tomorrow you must be laid to eternal rest. Where’s Barnardine?"
As fast lock’d up in sleep as guiltless labour When it lies starkly in the traveller’s bones: He will not wake.,As fast asleep as the most innocent of exhausted laborers. He won’t wake up.
Who can do good on him?,"Who could do him any good, anyway? Well, go, prepare yourself. (knocking is heard offstage)"
"But, hark, what noise? Heaven give your spirits comfort!",What’s that noise? (to Claudio) Heaven give your spirits comfort!
By and by. I hope it is some pardon or reprieve,In a minute. I hope it’s some pardon or reprieve for gentle Claudio.
Welcome father.,"Welcome, father."
"The best and wholesomest spirts of the night Envelope you, good Provost! Who call’d here of late?","The best, most wholesome night spirits surround you, good Provost! Who’s been here lately?"
"None, since the curfew rung.","No one, since the curfew bell rung at : p.m. curfew bell rang."
Not Isabel?,Not Isabel?
No.,No.
"They will, then, ere’t be long.","Someone will be, then, before long."
What comfort is for Claudio?,Is there any news to give comfort to Claudio?
There’s some in hope.,There’s comfort in hope.
It is a bitter deputy.,Angelo’s a cruel deputy.
"Not so, not so; his life is parallel’d Even with the stroke and line of his great justice: He doth with holy abstinence subdue That in himself which he spurs on his power Which he corrects, then were he tyrannous; But this being so, he’s just.","No, no. His life parallels the same straight line that his mighty justice draws. With religious restraint, he suppresses in himself the same impulses he persecutes in others. If he were stained with the sort of sins he punishes, then he’d be a tyrant. But because he’s virtuous, he’s fair. (knocking is heard offstage)"
Now are they come.,They’re here.
This is a gentle provost: seldom when,This provost is a nice man. It’s rare that a hardened jailer has sympathy for his fellow men. (knocking is heard offstage)
How now! what noise? That spirit’s possessed with haste That wounds the unsisting postern with these strokes.,What is that noise? That messenger’s so impatient he’s going to hurt that poor door with his knocking.
There he must stay until the officer Arise to let him in: he is call’d up.,He’s stuck there until the officer at the gate wakes up to let him in. The officer’s up now.
But he must die to-morrow?,Haven’t you received any order yet countermanding Claudio’s execution tomorrow?
"None, sir, none.","None, sir, none."
"As near the dawning, provost, as it is, You shall hear more ere morning.","Even though it’s almost dawn, provost, you’ll have news before morning."
"You something know; yet I believe there comes No countermand; no such example have we: Besides, upon the very siege of justice Lord Angelo hath to the public ear","Perhaps you know something. But I don’t think any reprieve is coming. There’s no precedent for it. Besides, Lord Angelo declared the opposite, in public, from the judge’s bench."
This is his lordship’s man.,This is his lordship’s servant.
And here comes Claudio’s pardon.,And here comes Claudio’s pardon.
"(Giving a paper) My lord hath sent you this note; and by me this smallest article of it, neither in time, matter, or other circumstance. Good morrow; for, as I take it, it is almost day.","(presenting a paper) My lord has sent you this note, and charged me to tell you not to swerve from the smallest item in it—not the time, details, or anything else. Good morning, since I gather it’s almost morning."
I shall obey him.,I will obey him.
"For which the pardoner himself is in. Hence hath offence his quick celerity, When it is born in high authority: When vice makes mercy, mercy’s so extended, Now, sir, what news?","(to himself) This is his pardon, bought by the same sin Angelo committed. Crimes spread quickly when those in power perpetrate them as well. When evildoers extend mercy, they widen mercy’s grasp, pardoning other sinners because they love the sin. Now, sir, what’s the news?"
"I told you. Lord Angelo, belike thinking me remiss in mine office, awakens me with this unwonted putting-on; methinks strangely, for he hath not used it before.","I told you. Lord Angelo, thinking me careless in my duties maybe, is putting unusual pressure on me. It’s strange—he’s never done this before."
"Pray you, let’s hear.","Please, let’s hear the letter."
"(Reads) ‘Whatsoever you may hear to the contrary, let Claudio be executed by four of the clock; and in the afternoon Barnardine: for my better satisfaction, this be duly performed; with a thought that more depends on it than we must yet deliver. Thus fail not to do your office, as you will answer it at your peril.’ What say you to this, sir?","(reads) “Whatever you may hear to the contrary, have Claudio executed by four o’clock, and Barnardine in the afternoon. Reassure me by sending me Claudio’s head by five o’clock. Be sure you do it, and be aware that more depends on it than I can reveal at this time. Don’t fail to do your duty, or you will be held accountable.” What do you say to this, sir?"
afternoon?,Who is this Barnardine who’s to be executed in the afternoon?
"A Bohemian born, but here nursed un and bred; one that is a prisoner nine years old.","He was born in Bohemia, but raised here. He’s been a prisoner for the last nine years."
How came it that the absent duke had not either have heard it was ever his manner to do so.,How did it happen that the absent duke neither freed him nor executed him? I’ve heard he usually does one or the other.
"His friends still wrought reprieves for him: and, indeed, his fact, till now in the government of Lord Angelo, came not to an undoubtful proof.","Barnardine’s friends kept getting him reprieves. And there was no clear evidence that he was actually guilty, until now, when Angelo came to power."
It is now apparent?,It’s clear now?
"Most manifest, and not denied by himself.","Very clear, and he doesn’t deny it himself."
Hath he born himself penitently in prison? how seems he to be touched?,Has he shown remorse while in prison? What effect has it had on him?
"A man that apprehends death no more dreadfully but of what’s past, present, or to come; insensible of mortality, and desperately mortal.","He’s a man who fears death as no worse than a drunken sleep. He’s careless, reckless, and fearless of the past, present, or future. He’s unaware of the concept of death, and desperately clinging to life."
He wants advice.,He needs counseling.
"He will hear none: he hath evermore had the liberty would not: drunk many times a day, if not many days entirely drunk. We have very oft awaked him, as if to carry him to execution, and showed him a seeming warrant for it: it hath not moved him at all.","He won’t listen to any. He’s always had the freedom to go anywhere inside the prison. If you gave him a chance to escape, he wouldn’t run. He’s drunk many times a day, or spends many days entirely drunk. Often, we’ve woken him up, as if to take him to be executed, and shown him a pretend warrant. It’s never affected him at all."
"provost, honesty and constancy: if I read it not truly, my ancient skill beguiles me; but, in the boldness of my cunning, I will lay myself in hazard. Claudio, whom here you have warrant to execute, is sentenced him. To make you understand this in a manifested effect, I crave but four days’ respite; for the which you are to do me both a present and a dangerous courtesy.","More of him soon. Provost, I see honesty and loyalty in your face. If I’m wrong, my old skill at reading people deceives me, but because I’m confident of my ability, I’ll take a chance. Claudio, whom you have a warrant to execute, deserves to die no more than Angelo, who sentenced him. I can clearly demonstrate this, but I need four days, so I’m going to ask you to do me an immediate and dangerous favor."
"Pray, sir, in what?","What is it, sir?"
In the delaying death.,Delay the death.
"A lack, how may I do it, having the hour limited, and an express command, under penalty, to deliver his head in the view of Angelo? I may make my case","Sorry, but how can I, with the time fixed and an explicit command to deliver his head to Angelo, at risk of penalty? I’ll find myself in Claudio’s shoes if I swerve from this in even the smallest way."
"By the vow of mine order I warrant you, if my instructions may be your guide. Let this Barnardine be this morning executed, and his head born to Angelo.","By my holy vows, I guarantee your safety if you follow my instructions. Execute this Barnardine this morning, and take his head to Angelo."
"Angelo hath seen them both, and will discover the favour.","Angelo’s seen both of them, and will recognize the face."
"Shave the head, and tie the beard; and say it was the desire of the penitent to be so bared before his death: you know the course is common. If any thing fall to you upon this, more than thanks and good against it with my life.","Oh, death’s a great disguiser, and you can help disguise him more. Shave his head and trim his beard, and say it was the prisoner’s request to be shaved before his death. You know that’s a common thing. If anything happens to you because of this—aside from thanks and good fortune —by the patron saint of my brotherhood, I’ll plead against it with my life."
"Pardon me, good father; it is against my oath.","Forgive me, good father. It’s against my oath."
"Were you sworn to the duke, or to the deputy?","Did you swear allegiance to the duke, or to the deputy?"
"To him, and to his substitutes.","To him, and to his representatives."
avouch the justice of your dealing?,Will you think you’ve done nothing wrong if the duke vouches for the justice of your action?
But what likelihood is in that?,But how likely is that?
"Not a resemblance, but a certainty. Yet since I see you fearful, that neither my coat, integrity, nor further than I meant, to pluck all fears out of you. Look you, sir, here is the hand and seal of the duke: you know the character, I doubt not; and the signet is not strange to you.","Not a possibility, but a certainty. Yet since I see you’re afraid, that neither my religious robes, integrity, nor arguments can easily persuade you, I’ll go farther than I meant to, to dispel all your fears. (displays a letter) Look, sir, here’s the duke’s handwriting and seal. You recognize them both, I’m sure."
I know them both.,I know them both.
"The contents of this is the return of the duke: you shall anon over-read it at your pleasure; where you shall find, within these two days he will be here. This is a thing that Angelo knows not; for he this perchance of the duke’s death; perchance entering into some monastery; but, by chance, nothing of what is writ. Look, the unfolding star calls up the shepherd. Put not yourself into amazement how these when they are known. Call your executioner, and off with Barnardine’s head: I will give him a present shrift and advise him for a better place. Yet you are amazed; but this shall absolutely resolve you.","This letter’s contents describe the duke’s return; you can read it over at your leisure, and you’ll learn that he’ll be here in two days. Angelo doesn’t know this, since today he’ll be getting some letters with strange news, maybe about the duke’s death, maybe about him entering some monastery—but nothing about what’s written here. Look, the morning star is out. Don’t be confused by all this. Everything makes sense after it’s been done. Call your executioner, and off with Barnardine’s head. I’ll give him confession, and prepare him for a better place. You’re still stunned, but this absolutely will explain everything to you. Let’s go, it’s almost dawn."
"I am as well acquainted here as I was in our house of profession: one would think it were Mistress Overdone’s own house, for here be many of her old customers. First, here’s young Master Rash; he’s in ninescore and seventeen pounds; of which he made five marks, ready money: marry, then ginger was not much in request, for the old women were all dead. Then is there here one Master Caper, at the suit of peach-coloured satin, which now peaches him a beggar. Then have we here young Dizzy, and young Master Deep-vow, and Master Copperspur, and Master Starve-lackey the rapier and dagger man, and young Forthlight the tilter, and brave Master Shooty the great traveller, and wild Half-can that stabbed Pots, and, I think, forty more; all great doers in our trade, and are now ‘for the Lord’s sake.’","I’ve got as many friends here as I did back at the brothel. You’d think it were Mistress Overdone’s very own house, so many of her old customers are here. First, here’s young Mister Hasty; he’s in for debt, having paid pounds for some coarse brown paper and old ginger candy, and making back only three pounds selling it. Ginger ginger was considered an aphrodisiac for older women Ginger wasn’t much in demand, because the old ladies were all dead. Then there’s one Mister Pirouette, defendant in a suit about four suits, brought by Mister Thick Velvet, the textile merchant. He’s being impeached over peach-colored satin. Then we’ve also got young Ditsy, and young Mister Cross-My-Heart, and Mister Cubic Zirconia and Mister Cheapskate, armed to fight duels, and young Kill-Heir who murdered robust Stuffed-Guts, and Mister Forward-Thrust the fighter, and dressed-to-kill Mister Shoe-Buckle, the world-traveler, and wild Half-Pint who stabbed Pots, and, I think, forty more gents—all great clients of our business, who now sing that old prison refrain, “Give us food for the Lord’s sake.”"
"Sirrah, bring Barnardine hither.","You there, bring Barnardine here."
Master Barnardine! you must rise and be hanged. Master Barnardine!,"Mister Barnardine! You’ve got to get up, and get onto the scaffold. Mister Barnardine!"
"What, ho, Barnardine!","Hey, Barnardine!"
(Within) A pox o’ your throats! Who makes that,(offstage) Damn your throats! Who’s making all that noise? Who are you?
"Your friends, sir; the hangman. You must be so good, sir, to rise and be put to death.","Your friends, sir, the hangmen. Please be so good, sir, as to rise and be put to death."
"(Within) Away, you rogue, away! I am sleepy.","(offstage) Go away, scoundrel. Away! I’m sleepy."
"Tell him he must awake, and that quickly too.","Tell him he has to wake up, and quickly too."
"executed, and sleep afterwards.","Please, Mister Barnardine, stay awake till you’re executed, and sleep afterwards."
"Go in to him, and fetch him out.",Get in there and fetch him.
"He is coming, sir, he is coming; I hear his straw rustle.","He’s coming, sir, he’s coming. I hear the straw on his cell floor rustling."
"Is the axe upon the block, sirrah?","Is the axe on the block, man?"
"Very ready, sir.","Very ready, sir."
"How now, Abhorson? what’s the news with you?","How goes it, Abhorson? What’s the news with you?"
"Truly, sir, I would desire you to clap into your prayers; for, look you, the warrant’s come.","Actually, sir, I’d like you to get on with your prayers, because the warrant’s arrived."
"You rogue, I have been drinking all night; I am not","You jerk, I’ve been drinking all night. I’m not ready for it."
"O, the better, sir; for he that drinks all night, and is hanged betimes in the morning, may sleep the sounder all the next day.","Oh, all the better, sir, for he who drinks all night and is hanged early in the morning may sleep better all the next day."
"Look you, sir; here comes your ghostly father: do","Look, sir, here comes your holy confessor. Think we’re joking now?"
"Sir, induced by my charity, and hearing how hastily you are to depart, I am come to advise you, comfort you and pray with you.","Sir, out of my sense of charity, and hearing how hastily you have to leave, I came to advise you, comfort you, and pray with you."
"Friar, not I: I have been drinking hard all night, shall beat out my brains with billets: I will not consent to die this day, that’s certain.","Not me, friar. I’ve been drinking hard all night, and either I get more time to prepare, or they’ll have to beat out my brains with clubs. I won’t agree to die today, that’s for sure."
"O, sir, you must: and therefore I beseech you Look forward on the journey you shall go.","Oh, sir, you must, and so I beg you to look forward to the journey you’re going on."
persuasion.,"I swear I will not die today, no matter who tries to persuade me."
But hear you.,But listen—
"Not a word: if you have any thing to say to me, come to my ward; for thence will not I to-day.","Not a word: if you got anything to say to me, come to my cell. I’m not leaving it today."
"After him, fellows; bring him to the block.","Unfit to live or die, that stony heart! After him, boys. Bring him to the block."
"Now, sir, how do you find the prisoner?","Now, sir, how is the prisoner?"
"A creature unprepared, unmeet for death; And to transport him in the mind he is","A creature unprepared, unfit for death. To send him off in his current frame of mind would be damnable."
"Here in the prison, father, There died this morning of a cruel fever One Ragozine, a most notorious pirate, A man of Claudio’s years; his beard and head This reprobate till he were well inclined; And satisfy the deputy with the visage Of Ragozine, more like to Claudio?","Here in prison, father, a notorious pirate named Ragozine just died this morning of a terrible fever. He was Claudio’s age, with the same color beard and hair. What if we forget about this reprobate until he’s agreeable, and send the deputy Ragozine’s head, which is more like Claudio’s?"
"O, ’tis an accident that heaven provides! Prefix’d by Angelo: see this be done, And sent according to command; whiles I Persuade this rude wretch willingly to die.","Oh, this is a heaven-sent chance! Do it at once. It’s getting near the time Angelo set for the execution. See that it’s done, and the head sent, as ordered. Meanwhile, I’ll persuade this uncivilized wretch to die willingly."
"This shall be done, good father, presently. And how shall we continue Claudio, To save me from the danger that might come If he were known alive?","We’ll do it, good father, immediately. But Barnardine must die this afternoon. And what do we do with Claudio, to save me from the danger of word getting out that he’s alive?"
"Let this be done. Ere twice the sun hath made his journal greeting To the under generation, you shall find Your safety manifested.","Let’s do this: put both Barnardine and Claudio in secret cells. Before two more days, it’ll be obvious you’re safe."
I am your free dependant.,I’m in your hands.
"Quick, dispatch, and send the head to Angelo.","Hurry, get the head and send it to Angelo."
"Now will I write letters to Angelo,— The provost, he shall bear them, whose contents Shall witness to him I am near at home, And that, by great injunctions, I am bound To meet me at the consecrated fount A league below the city; and from thence, By cold gradation and well-balanced form, We shall proceed with Angelo.","Now I’ll write letters to Angelo. The provost can deliver them. They’ll say I’m close to home and it’s of the utmost importance that I make a big public entrance. I’ll ask him to meet me at the holy springs three miles out of town. And from there, step by cool step, and observing all the proper procedures, I’ll deal with Angelo."
Here is the head; I’ll carry it myself.,Here’s the head. I’ll carry it myself.
Convenient is it. Make a swift return; For I would commune with you of such things That want no ear but yours.,"Suitable, isn’t it? Come back soon, because I want to talk with you about things that are for your ears only."
I’ll make all speed.,I’ll be as fast as I can.
"(Within) Peace, ho, be here!",(offstage) Hello! Peace to all here!
"The tongue of Isabel. She’s come to know If yet her brother’s pardon be come hither: But I will keep her ignorant of her good, To make her heavenly comforts of despair,","That’s Isabel’s voice. She’s here to see if her brother’s pardon has come yet. But I’ll hide the news for her own good, to turn her despair into divine comfort when she least expects it."
"Ho, by your leave!",May I come in?
"Good morning to you, fair and gracious daughter.","Good morning to you, fair and gracious daughter."
"The better, given me by so holy a man. Hath yet the deputy sent my brother’s pardon?",All the better a morning when so holy a man says it to me. Has the deputy sent my brother’s pardon yet?
His head is off and sent to Angelo.,"He has released him, Isabel, from the world. His head is off and sent to Angelo."
"Nay, but it is not so.","No, it’s not true."
"It is no other: show your wisdom, daughter, In your close patience.","It is. Be smart, daughter, and keep control of yourself."
"O, I will to him and pluck out his eyes!","Oh, I’ll go and tear his eyes out!"
You shall not be admitted to his sight.,They won’t let you see him.
Unhappy Claudio! wretched Isabel! Injurious world! most damned Angelo!,Unhappy Claudio! Wretched Isabel! Cruel world! Damned Angelo!
"This nor hurts him nor profits you a jot; Mark what I say, which you shall find By every syllable a faithful verity: The duke comes home to-morrow; nay, dry your eyes; One of our convent, and his confessor, Notice to Escalus and Angelo, Who do prepare to meet him at the gates, There to give up their power. If you can, pace your wisdom In that good path that I would wish it go, Grace of the duke, revenges to your heart, And general honour.","This neither hurts him nor helps you a bit. Control yourself and leave your case to heaven. Pay attention to what I say. Every syllable is truth you can rely on. The duke’s coming home tomorrow—no, dry your eyes. His confessor, who belongs to our monastery, gave me this information. He’s already sent word to Escalus and Angelo, who are preparing to meet him at the gates and surrender their authority to him there. If you can, steer your mind along the path I want it to follow. You’ll have your desire inflicted on this wretch, the favor of the duke, revenge to your heart’s content, and general acclaim."
I am directed by you.,I’ll do whatever you say.
"This letter, then, to Friar Peter give; Say, by this token, I desire his company At Mariana’s house to-night. Her cause and yours I’ll perfect him withal, and he shall bring you Before the duke, and to the head of Angelo I am combined by a sacred vow And shall be absent. Wend you with this letter: Command these fretting waters from your eyes With a light heart; trust not my holy order,","Then give this letter to Friar Peter. It’s the one he sent me about the duke’s return. It’ll be a sign that I want to meet him at Mariana’s house tonight. I’ll tell him all about her case and yours, and he’ll bring you before the duke, and you can thoroughly accuse Angelo face-to-face. My poor self is bound by a sacred vow, so I won’t be there. (giving the letter) Go with this letter. Banish those worried tears with a light heart. Never trust my holy order again if I steer you wrong. Who’s here?"
"Good even. Friar, where’s the provost?","Good evening. Friar, where’s the provost?"
"Not within, sir.","Not inside, sir."
"O pretty Isabella, I am pale at mine heart to see thine eyes so red: thou must be patient. I am fain my head fill my belly; one fruitful meal would set me to ’t. But they say the duke will be here to-morrow. By my troth, Isabel, I loved thy brother: if the old fantastical duke of dark corners had been","Oh, pretty Isabella, I’m sick at heart to see your eyes so red, but try to calm down. I have to dine on plain bread and water—to control my desire, I don’t fill my belly, since one big meal would get me excited. But they say the duke will be here tomorrow. I swear, Isabel, I loved your brother. If the good old whimsical duke, who loved to fool around in dark places, had been at home, Claudio would’ve lived."
"Sir, the duke is marvellous little beholding to your reports; but the best is, he lives not in them.","Sir, the duke is nothing at all like you report."
"Friar, thou knowest not the duke so well as I do: he’s a better woodman than thou takest him for.","Friar, you don’t know the duke as well as I do. He’s more of a womanizer than you think."
"Well, you’ll answer this one day. Fare ye well.","Well, you’ll pay for this one day. Goodbye."
"Nay, tarry; I’ll go along with thee I can tell thee pretty tales of the duke.","No, wait. I’ll go along with you. I can tell you some great tales about the duke."
"You have told me too many of him already, sir, if they be true; if not true, none were enough.","You’ve already told me too many, sir, if they’re true. If they’re not true, I don’t want to hear any."
I was once before him for getting a wench with child.,I appeared before him once for getting a girl pregnant.
Did you such a thing?,Did you do such a thing?
"Yes, marry, did I but I was fain to forswear it; they would else have married me to the rotten medlar.","Yes, I did, but I denied it under oath. They would’ve made me marry the rotten whore otherwise."
"Sir, your company is fairer than honest. Rest you well.","Sir, you look a lot nicer than you are. Goodbye."
"if bawdy talk offend you, we’ll have very little of it. Nay, friar, I am a kind of burr; I shall stick.","I swear, I’ll go with you to the end of the lane. If dirty talk offends you, we’ll avoid it. No, friar, I’m like a kind of burr—I’ll stick to you."
Every letter he hath writ hath disvouched other.,Every letter he’s written has contradicted the others.
"In most uneven and distracted manner. His actions show much like to madne pray heaven his wisdom be not tainted! And why meet him at the gates, and","In a very vague, inconsistent way. His behavior seems almost insane—pray God he’s not going mad! And why do we have to meet him at the gates, and surrender our authority there?"
I guess not.,I can’t guess.
"And why should we proclaim it in an hour before his entering, that if any crave redress of injustice, they should exhibit their petitions in the street?","And why, an hour before his arrival, should we announce that if anyone wants compensation for unjust treatment, they should come ready to present their petitions publicly?"
"complaints, and to deliver us from devices hereafter, which shall then have no power to stand against us.","He gives a reason for that: to be able to deal promptly with the complaints, and to save us from future lawsuits."
"Well, I beseech you, let it be proclaimed betimes notice to such men of sort and suit as are to meet him.","Well, I urge you to announce it early in the morning. I’ll come pick you up at your house. Alert all the high-ranking officials who are supposed to meet him."
"I shall, sir. Fare you well.","I will, sir. Goodbye."
Good night.,Good night.
"And dull to all proceedings. A deflower’d maid! And by an eminent body that enforced The law against it! But that her tender shame Will not proclaim against her maiden loss, For my authority bears of a credent bulk, That no particular scandal once can touch But it confounds the breather. He should have lived, Save that riotous youth, with dangerous sense, By so receiving a dishonour’d life With ransom of such shame. Would yet he had lived! A lack, when once our grace we have forgot, Nothing goes right: we would, and we would not a reference to Romans : we would, and we would not .","This thing I’ve done has totally destroyed me. I’m stupid, can’t concentrate on anything. A girl robbed of her virginity, and by a respected public figure who enforced the law against sex! If she weren’t too ashamed to admit it, she could easily denounce me! But her head tells her not to, because my credibility is so strong that any scandal would ruin the person who spreads it, not me. I would’ve let Claudio live, except that a hotheaded youth like him might have come after me someday, feeling that his life is dishonored because he paid such a shameful price for it. Even so, I wish I’d let him live. Sadly, nothing goes right once we forget virtue. I don’t do the good thing, which I don’t want to do, but the evil I don’t want to commit, that I do."
These letters at fit time deliver me[.],"At the right time, deliver these letters for me."
"The provost knows our purpose and our plot. The matter being afoot, keep your instruction, And hold you ever to our special drift; As cause doth minister. Go call at Flavius’ house, And tell him where I stay: give the like notice To Valentinus, Rowland, and to Crassus, And bid them bring the trumpets to the gate;","The provost knows about my plan. Once things get going, remember your orders and follow my lead, though sometimes you can deviate from the plan, if it seems appropriate. Go to Flavius’ house, and tell him where I’m staying. Inform Valentinus, Rowland, and Crassus, too, and ask them to bring the trumpeters to the gate. But send me Flavius first."
It shall be speeded well.,I’ll do it right away.
"I thank thee, Varrius; thou hast made good haste: Come, we will walk. There’s other of our friends Will greet us here anon, my gentle Varrius.","Thanks, Varrius, you got here fast. Let’s get going. More of our friends will be here soon, honorable Varrius."
"To speak so indirectly I am loath: I would say the truth; but to accuse him so, That is your part: yet I am advised to do it; He says, to veil full purpose.","I hate to speak so evasively. I’d rather tell the truth. But to accuse Angelo is your job, the friar says, and he advises me to lie, to hide our real aim."
Be ruled by him.,We should do as he says.
"Besides, he tells me that, if peradventure He speak against me on the adverse side, I should not think it strange; for ’tis a physic That’s bitter to sweet end.","Besides, he tells me that I shouldn’t think it strange if he happens to contradict me. It’ll be like swallowing a bitter pill that offers a sweet cure."
I would Friar Peter—,I wish Friar Peter—
"O, peace! the friar is come.","Oh, wait! The friar’s here."
"Come, I have found you out a stand most fit, Where you may have such vantage on the duke, He shall not pass you. Twice have the trumpets sounded; Have hent the gates, and very near upon The duke is entering: therefore, hence, away!","Come on, I’ve found you a good place to stand, where you’ll be so positioned that the duke won’t be able to bypass you. The trumpets have blown twice, the most high-born and important people have already gathered at the gates, and the duke’s about to enter. So, let’s go!"
"My very worthy cousin, fairly met! Our old and faithful friend, we are glad to see you.","(to Angelo) My fellow nobleman, welcome! (to Escalus) My faithful old friend, I’m glad to see you."
Happy return be to your royal grace!,"Welcome home, your royal grace!"
"Many and hearty thankings to you both. Such goodness of your justice, that our soul Cannot but yield you forth to public thanks, Forerunning more requital.","Many hearty thanks to you both. I’ve been asking about you, and I’ve heard such good things about your rule that I just had to thank you publicly, as a preview of more rewards to come."
You make my bonds still greater.,You make my debt to you even greater.
"To lock it in the wards of covert bosom, When it deserves, with characters of brass, A forted residence ’gainst the tooth of time And razure of oblivion. Give me your hand, That outward courtesies would fain proclaim Favours that keep within. Come, Escalus, You must walk by us on our other hand; And good supporters are you.","Oh, you’re extremely worthy, and it’d be wrong of me to hide it in my heart, when it deserves to be written in brass letters, as on a monument, where time can’t erase it. Give me your hand, and let the people see, so they’ll know how proud I am to display my high regard for you. Come, Escalus, you must walk with me on my other side. You make a fine supporter in heraldry, one of the figures that holds up a shield (as in a coat of arms, for instance) supporter ."
Now is your time: speak loud and kneel before him.,Now’s the time: speak up and kneel before him.
"Justice, O royal duke! Vail your regard Upon a wrong’d, I would fain have said, a maid! O worthy prince, dishonour not your eye By throwing it on any other object And given me justice, justice, justice, justice!","Justice, royal duke! Look down here, at a girl—I wish I could say a virgin—who has been wronged. Oh, worthy prince, don’t consider anything else until you’ve heard my valid case and given me justice, justice, justice, justice!"
Relate your wrongs; in what? by whom? be brief. Here is Lord Angelo shall give you justice: Reveal yourself to him.,Describe how you’ve been wronged—in what way? By whom? Be brief. Lord Angelo here will give you justice. Tell him your complaint.
"You bid me seek redemption of the devil: Hear me yourself; for that which I must speak Must either punish me, not being believed, Or wring redress from you. Hear me, O hear me, here!","Oh, worthy duke, you’re urging me to ask the devil for help. Listen to me yourself. What I have to say will result either in you not believing and punishing me, or you feeling compelled to right the wrong. Hear me, oh hear me, here!"
"She hath been a suitor to me for her brother Cut off by course of justice,—","My lord, I’m afraid she’s not in her right mind. She’s appeared before me, begging for her brother, who was executed by the justice system—"
By course of justice!,By the justice system!
And she will speak most bitterly and strange.,"And she will speak in a very bitter, strange way."
"That Angelo’s forsworn; is it not strange? That Angelo’s a murderer; is ’t not strange? That Angelo is an adulterous thief, An hypocrite, a virgin-violator;","I’ll speak strangely, but truthfully. That Angelo’s a liar, isn’t that strange? That Angelo’s a murderer, isn’t that strange? That Angelo’s an adulterous thief, a hypocrite, a man who rapes virgins, isn’t that extremely strange?"
"Nay, it is ten times strange.",That’s strange to the tenth degree.
"It is not truer he is Angelo Than this is all as true as it is strange: Nay, it is ten times true; for truth is truth","It’s just as true as the fact that he’s Angelo, and this is all as true as it is strange. No, it’s true to the tenth degree, for the truth is the truth, no matter how much you multiply it."
"Away with her! Poor soul, She speaks this in the infirmity of sense.","Take her away! Poor soul, she’s insane."
"O prince, I conjure thee, as thou believest There is another comfort than this world, That I am touch’d with madness! Make not impossible That which but seems unlike: ’tis not impossible But one, the wicked’st caitiff on the ground, May seem as shy, as grave, as just, as absolute In all his dressings, characts, titles, forms, Be an arch-villain; believe it, royal prince: If he be less, he’s nothing; but he’s more, Had I more name for badness.","Oh, prince, I beg you, as you believe in a better world than this one, don’t dismiss me by thinking I’m mad! Don’t assume something’s impossible because it’s unlikely. It’s not impossible that the wickedest wretch on the face of the earth may look just as cautious, as dignified, as fair, as perfect as Angelo—even as Angelo, for all his official finery, badges, titles, and ceremonies, can be an arch-villain. Believe it, royal prince. If he’s less than a wretch, he’s nothing. But he’s more, if only I had more names for badness."
"If she be mad,—as I believe no other,— Her madness hath the oddest frame of sense, Such a dependency of thing on thing, As e’er I heard in madness.","I declare, if she’s mad—as I believe she is—her madness has an oddly rational sound. I’ve rarely heard such coherent logic from someone insane."
"Harp not on that, nor do not banish reason For inequality; but let your reason serve To make the truth appear where it seems hid, And hide the false seems true.","Oh, gracious duke, don’t harp on that. But don’t dismiss rational statements because they don’t jibe with appearances. Use your intelligence to uncover the hidden truth, which is obscured by lies that seem like truth."
"Have, sure, more lack of reason. What would you say?",A lot of sane people make a lot less sense. What would you like to say?
"I am the sister of one Claudio, Condemn’d upon the act of fornication To lose his head; condemn’d by Angelo: Was sent to by my brother; one Lucio As then the messenger,—","I am the sister of one Claudio, sentenced to die by the decree against fornication—sentenced by Angelo. I was about to enter a convent, when my brother contacted me. He sent me a message through a man named Lucio—"
"That’s I, an’t like your grace: I came to her from Claudio, and desired her For her poor brother’s pardon.","That’s me, if it please your grace: I came to her from Claudio, and asked her to try her good luck in asking Lord Angelo for her poor brother’s pardon."
That’s he indeed.,"Yes, that’s the man."
You were not bid to speak.,No one asked you to speak.
"No, my good lord;","No, my good lord, but no one asked me to be quiet, either."
"I wish you now, then; Pray you, take note of it: and when you have A business for yourself, pray heaven you then Be perfect.","I’m asking you now, then. Remember it. And when you have your own business before me, pray heaven you behave yourself."
I warrant your honour.,"I’ll take notice, your honor."
The warrants for yourself; take heed to’t.,The notice is for yourself. Pay attention to it.
"This gentleman told somewhat of my tale,—",This gentleman has told some of my story—
Right.,Right.
It may be right; but you are i’ the wrong,"It may be right, but you’re wrong to interrupt. Proceed."
"I went To this pernicious caitiff deputy,—","I went to this wicked, evil deputy—"
That’s somewhat madly spoken.,You’re sounding crazy.
Pardon it;,Excuse me—the choice of words is appropriate.
Mended again. The matter; proceed.,That’s better. Continue.
"In brief, to set the needless process by, How I persuaded, how I pray’d, and kneel’d, How he refell’d me, and how I replied,— I now begin with grief and shame to utter: He would not, but by gift of my chaste body To his concupiscible intemperate lust, Release my brother; and, after much debatement, And I did yield to him: but the next morn betimes, His purpose surfeiting, he sends a warrant For my poor brother’s head.","To make a long story short—because it took a while, how I begged, how I prayed and kneeled, how he refused me, and how I replied—I’ll sadly and shamefully get to the awful ending. He wouldn’t release my brother unless I gave my chaste body over to his yearning lust. And after much internal debate, my sisterly pity overcame my honor, and I gave in to him. But having got what he wanted, early the next morning he sent an order for my poor brother’s head."
This is most likely!,(sarcastically) This is very believable!
"O, that it were as like as it is true!","Oh, I wish it were as believable as it is true!"
"By heaven, fond wretch, thou knowist not what thou speak’st, Or else thou art suborn’d against his honour In hateful practise. First, his integrity Stands without blemish. Next, it imports no reason Faults proper to himself: if he had so offended, He would have weigh’d thy brother by himself And not have cut him off. Some one hath set you on: Confess the truth, and say by whose advice","Heavens above, you poor fool, you don’t know what you’re saying, or else you’ve been bribed to falsely accuse him. First of all, his integrity is beyond reproach. Next, it makes no sense that he should so vigorously prosecute crimes he himself commits. If he had committed such a crime, he would’ve judged your brother against himself, and not executed him. Someone has put you up to this. Confess the truth, and tell us who urged you to come here with this accusation."
"And is this all? Then, O you blessed ministers above, Keep me in patience, and with ripen’d time Unfold the evil which is here wrapt up As I, thus wrong’d, hence unbelieved go!","That’s it? Then, oh, you blessed angels above, help me be patient, and let time reveal the evil hiding here behind appearances! Heaven protect your grace from harm. Since you don’t believe me, I have to go."
I know you’ld fain be gone. An officer! To prison with her! Shall we thus permit A blasting and a scandalous breath to fall Who knew of Your intent and coming hither?,"I bet you’d like to go. Officer, take her to prison! Should I permit such destructive, scandalous rumors about someone so close to me? This must be a conspiracy. Who knew about your plan, and that you were coming here?"
"One that I would were here, Friar Lodowick.","Someone I wish were here now, Friar Lodowick."
"A ghostly father, belike. Who knows that Lodowick?","A holy ghost, probably. Who knows this Lodowick?"
"My lord, I know him; ’tis a meddling friar; For certain words he spake against your grace In your retirement, I had swinged him soundly.","My lord, I know him. He’s the sort of friar who’s always meddling in people’s business. I don’t like the man. If he hadn’t been a member of the clergy, I would have punched him out for certain words he spoke against your grace while you were away."
"Words against me? this is a good friar, belike! And to set on this wretched woman here",Words against me? Some holy friar this is! And to set this wretched woman here against my replacement! Someone locate this friar.
"But yesternight, my lord, she and that friar, I saw them at the prison: a saucy friar, A very scurvy fellow.","Just yesterday, my lord, I saw her and this friar at the prison. He’s a smart-aleck, a very nasty piece of work."
"Blessed be your royal grace! Your royal ear abused. First, hath this woman Most wrongfully accused your substitute, Who is as free from touch or soil with her As she from one ungot.","God bless your royal grace! I’ve stood by, my lord, and I’ve heard your royal ears deceived. First, this woman has wrongfully accused your replacement, who is as far from any sexual or moral misbehavior with her as she is from a virgin birth."
Know you that Friar Lodowick that she speaks of?,I never believed anything else. Do you know this Friar Lodowick she’s talking about?
"I know him for a man divine and holy; Not scurvy, nor a temporary meddler, As he’s reported by this gentleman; Did, as he vouches, misreport your grace.","I know him for a divine and holy man, not lowdown, and not someone who meddles in earthly pleasures, as this gentleman reports. And, trust me, he’s a man that never slandered your grace."
"My lord, most villanously; believe it.","My lord, he did, and very maliciously too. Believe it."
"Well, he in time may come to clear himself; But at this instant he is sick my lord, Being come to knowledge that there was complaint Intended ’gainst Lord Angelo, came I hither, To speak, as from his mouth, what he doth know Is true and false; and what he with his oath Whensoever he’s convented. First, for this woman. To justify this worthy nobleman, So vulgarly and personally accused, Her shall you hear disproved to her eyes,","Well, in time he may come to clear himself, but at this instant he’s sick, my lord, suffering a rare fever. Learning there was an accusation planned against Lord Angelo, he personally asked me to come here and speak, as he would have, about what he knows is true and false. And when he’s summoned, he’ll give his oath and furnish proof that will clear everything up. This worthy nobleman, who’s been so publicly and personally accused, will be vindicated, and this woman will be discredited to her face, to such an extent that she herself will have to admit it."
"Good friar, let’s hear it.","Good friar, let’s hear it."
"Do you not smile at this, Lord Angelo? O heaven, the vanity of wretched fools! Give us some seats. Come, cousin Angelo; Of your own cause. Is this the witness, friar? First, let her show her face, and after speak.","Isn’t this funny, Lord Angelo? Oh, heaven, the nerve of these wretched fools! Give us some seats. Come, Angelo, my friend. I won’t take any part in this. You be the judge of your own case. Is this the witness, friar? First, let her show her face, and then speak."
"Pardon, my lord; I will not show my face Until my husband bid me.","Pardon me, my lord. I will not show my face until my husband bids me to."
"What, are you married?","What, are you married?"
"No, my lord.","No, my lord."
Are you a maid?,Are you single?
"No, my lord.","No, my lord."
"A widow, then?","A widow, then?"
"Neither, my lord.","Neither, my lord."
"Why, you are nothing then: neither maid, widow, nor wife?","So, you are neither single, widow, nor wife?"
"My lord, she may be a punk; for many of them are neither maid, widow, nor wife.","My lord, she may be a prostitute. Many of them are neither virgin, widow, nor wife."
Silence that fellow: I would he had some cause,Keep that fellow quiet. I wish he were up on some charge of his own.
"Well, my lord.","OK, my lord."
My lord; I do confess I ne’er was married; And I confess besides I am no maid: I have known my husband; yet my husband,"My lord, I do admit I’ve never been married, and I also admit I’m not a virgin. I’ve slept with my husband, but my husband doesn’t know he’s slept with me."
"He was drunk then, my lord: it can be no better.","He was drunk then, my lord. That’s the best explanation."
"For the benefit of silence, would thou wert so too!","For silence’s sake, be silent yourself!"
"Well, my lord.","OK, my lord."
This is no witness for Lord Angelo.,This is hardly a witness for Lord Angelo.
"She that accuses him of fornication, In self-same manner doth accuse my husband, And charges him my lord, with such a time When I’ll depose I had him in mine arms","I’m coming to it now, my lord. The woman who’s accusing him of fornication is actually accusing my husband. And she charges it was at the very time when, as I’ll swear, he was in my arms, making love to me."
Charges she more than me?,Is she accusing more men besides me?
Not that I know.,Not that I know of.
No? you say your husband.,No? You say your husband.
"Why, just, my lord, and that is Angelo, But knows he thinks that he knows Isabel’s.","Why, exactly, my lord. He’s Angelo, who believes he never slept with me, and who believes he slept with Isabel."
This is a strange abuse. Let’s see thy face.,This is a strange deception. Let’s see your face.
My husband bids me; now I will unmask.,"My husband bids me to, so I’ll lift my veil."
"This is that face, thou cruel Angelo, This is the hand which, with a vow’d contract, Was fast belock’d in thine; this is the body That took away the match from Isabel, And did supply thee at thy garden-house","This is the face, you cruel Angelo, that you once swore was well worth looking at. This is the hand that was locked in yours with a signed contract. This is the body that kept your appointment with Isabel, and satisfied you in your garden-house, pretending to be her."
Know you this woman?,Do you know this woman?
"Carnally, she says.","Sexually, she says."
"Sirrah, no more!","Quiet, you!"
"Enough, my lord.","Right, my lord."
"And five years since there was some speech of marriage Betwixt myself and her; which was broke off, Partly for that her promised proportions Came short of composition, but in chief In levity: since which time of five years I never spake with her, saw her, nor heard from her, Upon my faith and honour.","My lord, I must confess I know this woman. Five years ago, there was some talk of marriage between she and I. It was broken off, partly because her dowry fell short of the agreed amount, but mainly because she had a reputation for promiscuity. For the last five years, I haven’t spoken with her, seen her, or heard from her, I swear."
"Noble prince, As there is sense in truth and truth in virtue, I am affianced this man’s wife as strongly As words could make up vows: and, my good lord, But Tuesday night last gone in’s garden-house Let me in safety raise me from my knees Or else for ever be confixed here, A marble monument!","Noble prince, as light comes from heaven and words from breath, as there is meaning in truth and truth in virtue, I am engaged to this man as strongly as words can make vows. And, my good lord, last Tuesday night in a garden house, he treated me as a wife. This being the truth, let me safely rise from my knees, or else let me be fixed here forever, like a marble monument!"
"I did but smile till now: My patience here is touch’d. I do perceive These poor informal women are no more But instruments of some more mightier member That sets them on: let me have way, my lord,","I was amused up until now, but now my patience is exhausted. My good lord, let me apply the full force of the law. I believe these poor, demented women are just tools of some more powerful person who has put them up to this. Give me the chance, my lord, to unravel this plot."
"Ay, with my heart And punish them to your height of pleasure. Thou foolish friar, and thou pernicious woman, Compact with her that’s gone, think’st thou thy oaths, Were testimonies against his worth and credit That’s seal’d in approbation? You, Lord Escalus, Sit with my cousin; lend him your kind pains To find out this abuse, whence ’tis derived. Let him be sent for.","Yes, with all my heart, and punish them as much as you like. You foolish friar and you wicked woman, in collusion with that one we just took away—even if you swore by every single saint, do you think your oaths would mean anything against his worthiness and reputation, which are proven beyond a doubt? You, Lord Escalus, sit with my colleague. Do all you can to help him unravel this conspiracy and discover where it came from. There’s another friar who put them up to this. Send for him."
"Would he were here, my lord! for he indeed Hath set the women on to this complaint: Your provost knows the place where he abides","I wish he were here, my lord! Because he did encourage the women to make this accusation. Your provost knows where he lives and can go get him."
Go do it instantly.,"Go do it, immediately."
"And you, my noble and well-warranted cousin, Whom it concerns to hear this matter forth, Do with your injuries as seems you best, But stir not you till you have well determined Upon these slanderers.","(to Angelo) And you, my noble and respected friend, who have a stake in seeing this matter to the end, deal with the crimes against you as you think best, with any form of punishment. I’ll leave you for a while, but don’t move until you have fully decided the fate of these slanderers."
"My lord, we’ll do it throughly.","My lord, we’ll do it thoroughly."
"Signior Lucio, did not you say you knew that","Signor Lucio, didn’t you say you knew this Friar Lodowick to be a dishonest person?"
‘Cucullus non facit monachum:’ honest in nothing but in his clothes; and one that hath spoke most villanous speeches of the duke.,“A hood does not make a monk”—his friar’s clothes are the only holy thing about him. And he’s said very evil things about the duke.
We shall entreat you to abide here till he come and notable fellow.,We’ll ask you to stay here until he comes and we lay those charges against him. We think this friar’s a notorious character.
"As any in Vienna, on my word.","As much as anyone in Vienna, on my word."
Call that same Isabel here once again; I would speak with her.,Call that Isabel here once again. I want to speak with her.
"Pray you, my lord, give me leave to question; you","Please, my lord, let me do the questioning. You’ll see how I’ll handle her."
"Not better than he, by her own report.","Not better than he, according to her."
Say you?,What did you say?
"Marry, sir, I think, if you handled her privately, she would sooner confe perchance, publicly,","Frankly, sir, I think, if you handled her privately, she’d be more likely to confess. She might be ashamed to do it in public."
I will go darkly to work with her.,I’ll keep the matter out of the spotlight.
That’s the way; for women are light at midnight.,That’s the way. Women are easiest in the dark.
"Come on, mistre here’s a gentlewoman denies all that you have said.","(to Isabella) Listen, mi this woman contradicts everything you’ve said."
the provost.,"My lord, here comes the rascal I was talking about, with the provost."
In very good time: speak not you to him till we call upon you.,All in good time. Don’t speak to him until we summon you.
Mum.,Mum’s the word.
Lord Angelo? they have confessed you did.,"Now, sir, did you egg these women on to slander Lord Angelo? They have confessed you did."
’Tis false.,It’s a lie.
How! know you where you are?,What! Do you know where you are?
Respect to your great place! and let the devil Where is the duke? ’tis he should hear me speak.,All due respect to your great office—even the devil gets some respect for being the king of Hell. Where’s the duke? He’s the one who should hear me speak.
The duke’s in us; and we will hear you speak: Look you speak justly.,"We represent the duke, and we will hear you speak. See that you speak honestly."
"Boldly, at least. But, O, poor souls, Good night to your redress! Is the duke gone? Then is your cause gone too. The duke’s unjust, Thus to retort your manifest appeal, And put your trial in the villain’s mouth","Boldly, at least. But, oh, you poor souls, did you come to find your lambs in the fox’s den? Say goodnight to any justice, then. Is the duke gone? Then your case is gone too. The duke’s unjust, rejecting your accusation and turning your case over to the very villain you came here to accuse."
This is the rascal; this is he I spoke of.,This is the rascal I was talking about.
"Why, thou unreverend and unhallow’d friar, Is’t not enough thou hast suborn’d these women To accuse this worthy man, but, in foul mouth To call him villain? and then to glance from him To the duke himself, to tax him with injustice? Take him hence; to the rack with him! We’ll touse you Joint by joint, but we will know his purpose.","Why, you disrespectful and unholy friar, it’s not enough that you’ve enlisted these women to accuse this worthy man, but with your foul mouth you call him a villain within his earshot? And then to shift your attack from him to the duke himself, to accuse the duke of being unjust? Take him away, to the rack with him! We’ll tear you limb from limb, until we discover your motive. To call the duke “unjust”!"
"Be not so hot; the duke Dare no more stretch this finger of mine than he Dare rack his own: his subject am I not, Nor here provincial. My business in this state Where I have seen corruption boil and bubble Till it o’er-run the stew; laws for all faults, But faults so countenanced, that the strong statutes Stand like the forfeits in a barber’s shop,","Don’t get so excited. The duke doesn’t dare to hurt my little finger any more than he’d torture his own. I’m not his subject, or a native of this province. My business in this state has made me an on-looker here in Vienna, where I’ve seen corruption boil and bubble until it overflows out of the brothels. You’ve got laws for all the crimes, but the crimes are so tolerated that the strong statutes are like those joke lists of “house rules” in stores Elizabethan barbers posted mock lists of penalties for customers behaving badly in the shop joke lists of “house rules” in stores —people look at them just to laugh."
Slander to the state! Away with him to prison!,Slandering the state! Take him away to prison!
"What can you vouch against him, Signior Lucio? Is this the man that you did tell us of?","What evidence do you have against him, Signor Lucio? Is this the man you told us about?"
"’Tis he, my lord. Come hither, goodman baldpate:","He’s the one, my lord. Come here, baldy friars traditionally shaved their heads baldy . Do you know me?"
"I remember you, sir, by the sound of your voice: I met you at the prison, in the absence of the duke.","I remember you, sir, by the sound of your voice. I met you at the prison, back when the duke was away."
"O, did you so? And do you remember what you said of the duke?","Oh, you did? And do you remember what you said about the duke?"
"Most notedly, sir.","Definitely, sir."
"fool, and a coward, as you then reported him to be?","Do you, sir? And was the duke a pimp, a fool, and a coward, as you then reported him to be?"
"You must, sir, change persons with me, ere you make that my report: you, indeed, spoke so of him; and much more, much worse.","You must, sir, switch identities with me, before you claim those were my words. You were the one who said that about him, and much more, much worse."
nose for thy speeches?,"Damn you, fellow! Didn’t I smack you in the nose for your comments?"
I protest I love the duke as I love myself.,I swear I love the duke like I love myself.
"Hark, how the villain would close now, after his treasonable abuses!","Look, how the villain would appease us now, after his treasonable slanders!"
"him to prison! Where is the provost? Away with him to prison! lay bolts enough upon him: let him speak no more. Away with those giglots too, and with the other confederate companion!","You can’t talk to this type of fellow. Take him away to prison! Where is the provost? Take him to prison! Put him in chains, gag him. Away with those loose women, too, and their co-conspirator."
"(To Provost) Stay, sir; stay awhile.","(to the Provost) Wait, sir, stay a minute."
"What, resists he? Help him, Lucio.","Is he resisting arrest? Help the provost, Lucio."
"Come, sir; come, sir; come, sir; foh, sir! Why, you bald-pated, lying rascal, you must be hooded, must you? Show your knave’s visage, with a pox to you! Will’t not off?","Come on, sir. Come on, sir. Come on, sir. Ugh! So, you bald, lying rascal, you want to keep your hood on, do you? Show your lowlife face, damn you! Show your thieving face, and be hanged in an hour! Won’t it come off?"
"Thou art the first knave that e’er madest a duke. First, provost, let me bail these gentle three. (To LUCIO) Sneak not away, sir; for the friar and you Must have a word anon. Lay hold on him.","You’re the first lowlife to ever turn someone into a duke. First, provost, let me free these three gentle people. (to LUCIO) Don’t you sneak away, sir. The friar and you will have a chat later on. Hold him."
This may prove worse than hanging.,This may turn out worse than hanging.
"(To ESCALUS) What you have spoke I pardon: sit you down: We’ll borrow place of him. (To ANGELO) Sir, by your leave. Hast thou or word, or wit, or impudence, That yet can do thee office? If thou hast, And hold no longer out.","(to ESCALUS) I forgive the things you said to me. Sit down. We’ll take Angelo’s seat. (to ANGELO) Sir, if I may. Do you have any words, either intelligent or impudent, that can help you? If so, keep them until I tell my story. Don’t hold the truth back any longer."
"O my dread lord, I should be guiltier than my guiltiness, To think I can be undiscernible, Hath look’d upon my passes. Then, good prince, No longer session hold upon my shame, But let my trial be mine own confession: Immediate sentence then and sequent death","Oh my dreaded lord, I’d be even more guilty to think I could go undiscovered, now that I realize your grace, like some divine power, has seen my sins. So, good prince, stop inquiring about my shame. Let my confession count as my trial. I beg only for the mercy of an immediate sentence and then death."
"Come hither, Mariana. Say, wast thou e’er contracted to this woman?","Come here, Mariana. (to Angelo) Were you ever engaged to this woman?"
"I was, my lord.","I was, my lord."
"Go take her hence, and marry her instantly. Return him here again. Go with him, provost.","Take her and marry her at once. You perform the ceremony, friar, and when it’s done, bring him back here. Go with him, provost."
"My lord, I am more amazed at his dishonour Than at the strangeness of it.","My lord, I’m more amazed by Angelo’s dishonesty than by the strangeness of this situation."
"Come hither, Isabel. Advertising and holy to your business, Not changing heart with habit, I am still Attorney’d at your service.","Come here, Isabel. Your friar is now your prince, but my heart hasn’t changed with my clothes. I guided and devoted myself to your affairs then, and I’m still acting for you now."
"O, give me pardon, Your unknown sovereignty!","Oh, forgive me! To think that I, your servant, unknowingly used and created problems for your royal person!"
"You are pardon’d, Isabel: And now, dear maid, be you as free to us. Your brother’s death, I know, sits at your heart; Labouring to save his life, and would not rather Make rash remonstrance of my hidden power Than let him so be lost. O most kind maid, It was the swift celerity of his death, That brain’d my purpose. But, peace be with him! That life is better life, past fearing death, Than that which lives to fear: make it your comfort, So happy is your brother.","You’re forgiven, Isabel. And now, dear girl, be as generous to me. I know your brother’s death hurts you deeply. And you may be wondering why I disguised myself, working behind the scenes to save his life, and didn’t just use my authority rather than let him die. Sweet girl, it was the speed of his execution, which I thought would take longer, that ruined my plan. But, peace be with him! The afterlife is a better life, since you don’t have to fear death anymore. Try to take comfort in the fact that your brother has that happiness."
"I do, my lord.","I do, my lord."
"For this new-married man approaching here, Whose salt imagination yet hath wrong’d Your well defended honour, you must pardon For Mariana’s sake: but as he adjudged your brother,— Of sacred chastity and of promise-breach Thereon dependent, for your brother’s life,— The very mercy of the law cries out Most audible, even from his proper tongue, Haste still pays haste, and leisure answers leisure; Like doth quit like, and MEASURE still FOR MEASURE Matthew : - : “Judge not, that ye be not judged...with what measure you mete, it shall be measured to you again.” MEASURE still FOR MEASURE . Then, Angelo, thy fault’s thus manifested; Which, though thou wouldst deny, denies thee vantage. Where Claudio stoop’d to death, and with like haste. Away with him!","For Mariana’s sake, you must forgive this newly married man, whose lecherous imagination wronged your well-defended honor. But after he condemned your brother, he committed two crimes, violating your virginity and breaking his promise about the pardon that your brother’s life depended on. Even the merciful part of the law cries out, “an Angelo for Claudio, death for death!” Haste always results in hasty decisions, and deliberation comes from slowness. One thing is rewarded by a similar thing, and the measure of justice you use will be the measure used against you. So, Angelo, your crime is clear for all to see, and it denies you the right to any preferential treatment, even if you yourself feel otherwise. I sentence you to be executed on the very block where Claudio knelt to die, and just as quickly. Take him away!"
"O my most gracious lord, I hope you will not mock me with a husband.","Oh, my most gracious lord, please don’t make a mockery of my marriage!"
"Consenting to the safeguard of your honour, I thought your marriage fit; else imputation, For that he knew you, might reproach your life And choke your good to come; for his possessions, We do instate and widow you withal, To buy you a better husband.","It’s your husband who’s made a mockery of your marriage. I thought it appropriate that you be married, to protect your honor. Otherwise, revealing that he’d slept with you would haunt your life and destroy your future prospects. As for his possessions, technically they belong to the state, but we are giving you a widow’s rights and bequeathing them to you, to buy you a better husband."
"O my dear lord, I crave no other, nor no better man.","Oh my dear lord, I don’t want any other man or any better man."
Never crave him; we are definitive.,You shouldn’t want him. My decision is final.
"Gentle my liege,—",My gentle lord—
You do but lose your labour. Away with him to death!,You’re just wasting your time. Take him to his death!
"Now, sir, to you.","Now, sir, about you."
"Lend me your knees, and all my life to come I’ll lend you all my life to do you service.","Oh, my good lord! Sweet Isabel, take my side. Kneel with me, and for the rest of my life I’ll be at your service."
"Against all sense you do importune her: Should she kneel down in mercy of this fact, And take her hence in horror.","It makes no sense to beg her. If she were to kneel and plead for mercy, her brother’s horrified ghost would break through his stone-covered grave and drag her away with him."
"Isabel, Sweet Isabel, do yet but kneel by me; Hold up your hands, say nothing; I’ll speak all. And, for the most, become much more the better For being a little bad: so may my husband. O Isabel, will you not lend a knee?","Isabel, sweet Isabel, just kneel beside me, and hold out your hands. Don’t say anything, I’ll do all the talking. They say the best men are formed out of their faults, and most of them become much better for being a little bad. That might happen with my husband. Oh, Isabel, won’t you kneel?"
He dies for Claudio’s death.,He dies for Claudio’s death.
"As if my brother lived: I partly think A due sincerity govern’d his deeds, Till he did look on me: since it is so, Let him not die. My brother had but justice, For Angelo, His act did not o’ertake his bad intent, And must be buried but as an intent That perish’d by the way: thoughts are no subjects;","(kneeling) Generous sir, please look on this condemned man as if my brother were still alive. To some extent, I think his behavior was sincere, until he laid eyes on me. So, don’t let him die. My brother was justly treated, in the sense that he did the thing he was executed for. But Angelo didn’t actually fulfill his bad intentions, and his behavior should be considered with that fact in mind. Intentions are merely thoughts, and thoughts aren’t subject to our control."
"Merely, my lord.","Merely, my lord."
"Your suit’s unprofitable; stand up, I say. I have bethought me of another fault. Provost, how came it Claudio was beheaded","Your pleading’s no use. Stand up, I say. Another crime has just occurred to me. Provost, why was Claudio beheaded at such an unusual hour?"
It was commanded so.,It was so ordered.
Had you a special warrant for the deed?,Did you have a special warrant?
"No, my good lord; it was by private message.","No, my good lord, it was a private message."
For which I do discharge you of your office:,You’re fired for this. Turn in your keys.
"Pardon me, noble lord: I thought it was a fault, but knew it not; Yet did repent me, after more advice; For testimony whereof, one in the prison, I have reserved alive.","Forgive me, noble lord. I thought it might be wrong, but wasn’t sure. After further consideration, I did change my mind, and to prove I did, I kept alive another prisoner who was to be executed by a private order."
What’s he?,Who’s he?
His name is Barnardine.,His name is Barnardine.
I would thou hadst done so by Claudio.,I wish you had done the same with Claudio. Go get him. Let me see him.
"I am sorry, one so learned and so wise As you, Lord Angelo, have still appear’d, Should slip so grossly, both in the heat of blood. And lack of temper’d judgment afterward.","Lord Angelo, I am sorry that someone so educated and wise, as you always appeared to be, should slip so badly, both in the heat of desire and the lack of judgment afterward."
"And so deep sticks it in my penitent heart That I crave death more willingly than mercy; ’Tis my deserving, and I do entreat it.","I am sorry that I cause such sorrow, and it sticks so deeply in my penitent heart that it makes me crave death more than mercy. I deserve death, and beg for it."
Which is that Barnardine?,Which one is this Barnardine?
"This, my lord.","This one, my lord."
"There was a friar told me of this man. Sirrah, thou art said to have a stubborn soul. That apprehends no further than this world, And squarest thy life according. Thou’rt condemn’d: And pray thee take this mercy to provide For better times to come. Friar, advise him; I leave him to your hand. What muffled fellow’s that?","A certain friar told me about this man. (to BARNARDINE) Fellow, you’re said to have a stubborn soul, one that can’t imagine an existence beyond this one, and shapes your life accordingly. You’re doomed. But I pardon you for all your crimes here on earth, and hope you’ll take advantage of this mercy to prepare for the better world to come. Friar, counsel him. I leave him in your hands. Who’s that covered-up fellow?"
This is another prisoner that I saved. As like almost to Claudio as himself.,"This is another prisoner I saved, who should have died when Claudio lost his head. He looks almost exactly like Claudio."
"[To ISABELLA] If he be like your brother, for his sake Is he pardon'd; and, for your lovely sake, Give me your hand and say you will be mine. By this Lord Angelo perceives he’s safe; Methinks I see a quickening in his eye. Well, Angelo, your evil quits you well: Look that you love your wife; her worth worth yours. And yet here's one in place I cannot pardon. [To LUCIO] You, sirrah, that knew me for a fool, a coward, One all of luxury, an ass, a madman; Wherein have I so deserved of you, That you extol me thus?","(to ISABELLA) If he resembles your brother, then for his sake, he’s pardoned. And for your own lovely sake, give me your hand and say you’ll be mine. He’s my brother, too, but there’ll be a more appropriate time for that. By the way Angelo is behaving, I think he realizes this means he’s safe. Well, Angelo, your evil has repaid you well. Make sure you love your wife since her worth is equal to yours. I’m feeling merciful, and yet here’s someone I can’t forgive. (to LUCIO) You, who called me a fool, a coward, a lecher, an ass, a madman. What did I ever do to you that you call me these things?"
"trick. If you will hang me for it, you may; but I had rather it would please you I might be whipt.","I swear, my lord, I only spoke according to what people say of you. You can hang me for it, if you want, but I wouldn’t mind if you preferred to whip me."
"Whipt first, sir, and hanged after. Proclaim it, provost, round about the city. As I have heard him swear himself there’s one Whom he begot with child, let her appear, And he shall marry her: the nuptial finish’d, Let him be whipt and hang’d.","Whipping first, sir, and hanging afterward. Proclaim it, provost, around the city, that if this lecher wronged any woman, as I heard him swear himself he got someone pregnant, let her appear, and he’ll marry her. After the wedding, let him be whipped and hanged."
"Your highness said even now, I made you a duke: good my lord, do not recompense me in making me a cuckold.","I beg your highness, don’t marry me to a whore. Your highness just said I made you a duke. My good lord, don’t pay me back by making me husband of a cheating wife."
"Upon mine honour, thou shalt marry her. Thy slanders I forgive; and therewithal And see our pleasure herein executed.","By my honor, you will marry her. I forgive your slurs, and in so doing, lift your other punishments. Take him to prison, and see that my wishes are carried out."
"Marrying a punk, my lord, is pressing to death, whipping, and hanging.","Marrying a whore, my lord, is like being pressed to death a type of torture in which stones were piled upon a person until he confessed or was crushed pressed to death , whipped, and hanged."
Slandering a prince deserves it.,You deserve it for slandering a prince.
"Joy to you, Mariana! Love her, Angelo: I have confess’d her and I know her virtue. Thanks, good friend Escalus, for thy much goodne There’s more behind that is more gratulate. We shill employ thee in a worthier place. Forgive him, Angelo, that brought you home The head of Ragozine for Claudio’s: The offence pardons itself. Dear Isabel, Whereto if you’ll a willing ear incline, What’s mine is yours and what is yours is mine. So, bring us to our palace; where we’ll show What’s yet behind, that’s meet you all should know.","Claudio, the girl you wronged, make sure you marry her. Joy to you, Mariana! Love her, Angelo. I’ve heard her confession, and I know her virtue. Thanks, good friend Escalus, for being so good. A greater expression of my gratitude is yet to come. Thanks, provost, for your care and ability to keep secrets. I’m going to give you a better position. Forgive him, Angelo, for bringing you Ragozine’s head in place of Claudio’s. The crime redeems itself. Dear Isabel, I have a proposal that’s greatly to your benefit, if you’ll lend a willing ear. It’s along the lines of what’s mine is yours, and what’s yours is mine. So, accompany me to my palace, where I’ll show and tell you everything you ought to know."
