"In sooth, I know not why I am so sad. It wearies me; you say it wearies you. But how I caught it, found it, or came by it, What stuff ’tis made of, whereof it is born, And such a want-wit sadness makes of me, That I have much ado to know myself.","To be honest, I don’t know why I’m so sad. I’m tired of it, and you say you’re tired of it too. But I have no idea how I got so depressed. And if I can’t figure out what’s making me depressed, I must not understand myself very well."
"Your mind is tossing on the ocean, There, where your argosies with portly sail, Or, as it were, the pageants of the sea— Do overpeer the petty traffickers That curtsy to them, do them reverence As they fly by them with their woven wings.","You’re worried about your ships. Your mind is out there getting tossed around on the ocean with them. But they’re fine. They’re like huge parade floats on the sea. They’re so big they look down on the smaller ships, which all have to bow and then get out of the way. Your ships fly like birds past those little boats."
"The better part of my affections would Be with my hopes abroad. I should be still Plucking the grass to know where sits the wind, Peering in maps for ports and piers and roads. Misfortune to my ventures out of doubt Would make me sad.","Yes, believe me, if I had such risky business ventures in other countries, I’d be sad too. I’d worry about it every second. I’d constantly be tossing blades of grass into the air to find out which way the wind was blowing. I’d be peering over maps to figure out the best ports, piers, and waterways. Everything that made me worry about my ships would make me sad."
"My wind cooling my broth Would blow me to an ague when I thought What harm a wind too great at sea might do. But I should think of shallows and of flats And see my wealthy Andrew docked in sand, Vailing her high top lower than her ribs To kiss her burial. Should I go to church And not bethink me straight of dangerous rocks, Which, touching but my gentle vessel’s side, Would scatter all her spices on the stream, Enrobe the roaring waters with my silks, And now worth nothing? Shall I have the thought To think on this, and shall I lack the thought That such a thing bechanced would make me sad? But tell not me. I know Antonio","I’d get scared every time I blew on my soup to cool it, thinking of how a strong wind could wipe out my ships. Every time I glanced at the sand in an hourglass I’d imagine my ships wrecked on sandbars. I’d think of dangerous rocks every time I went to church and saw the stones it was made of. If my ship brushed up against rocks like that, its whole cargo of spices would be dumped into the sea. All of its silk shipments would be sent flying into the roaring waters. In one moment I’d go bankrupt. Who wouldn’t get sad thinking about things like that? It’s obvious. Antonio is sad because he’s so worried about his cargo."
"Believe me, no. I thank my fortune for it— My ventures are not in one bottom trusted, Nor to one place, nor is my whole estate Upon the fortune of this present year.","No, that’s not it, trust me. Thankfully my financial situation is healthy. I don’t have all of my money invested in one ship, or one part of the world. If I don’t do well this year, I’ll still be okay. So it’s not my business that’s making me sad."
"Why then, you are in love.","Well then, you must be in love."
"Fie, fie!","Oh, give me a break."
Not in love neither? Then let us say you are sad Because you are not merry—and ’twere as easy For you to laugh and leap and say you are merry Nature hath framed strange fellows in her time.,"You’re not in love either? Fine, let’s just say you’re sad because you’re not in a good mood. You know, it’d be just as easy for you to laugh and dance around and say you’re in a good mood. You could just say you’re not sad. Humans are so different."
"Some that will evermore peep through their eyes And laugh like parrots at a bagpiper, And other of such vinegar aspect Though Nestor swear the jest be laughable.","Some people will laugh at anything, and others are so grouchy they won’t even crack a smile when they hear something hysterically funny."
"Here comes Bassanio, your most noble kinsman, Gratiano, and Lorenzo. Fare ye well. We leave you now with better company.","Here comes your cousin Bassanio. And Gratiano and Lorenzo too. Goodbye, then. We’ll leave you to talk to them. They’re better company."
If worthier friends had not prevented me.,"I would’ve stayed to cheer you up, if your nobler friends hadn’t shown up."
Your worth is very dear in my regard. I take it your own business calls on you And you embrace th' occasion to depart.,You’re both very precious to me. But I understand. You need to leave to take care of your own business.
"Good morrow, my good lords.","(to BASSANIO, LORENZO, and GRATIANO) Good morning, gentlemen."
"(to SALARINO and SOLANIO) Good signors both, when shall we laugh? Say, when? You grow exceeding strange. Must it be so?","(to SALARINO and SOLANIO) Hello, friends. When are we going to have fun together again? Just name the time. We never see you anymore. Does it have to be that way?"
We’ll make our leisures to attend on yours.,Let us know when you want to get together. We’re available.
"My Lord Bassanio, since you have found Antonio, We two will leave you. But at dinnertime I pray you have in mind where we must meet.","Bassanio, we’ll say goodbye for now, since you’ve found Antonio. But don’t forget, we’re meeting for dinner tonight."
I will not fail you.,"Don’t worry, I’ll be there."
"You have too much respect upon the world. They lose it that do buy it with much care. Believe me, you are marvelously changed.","You don’t look well, Antonio. You’re taking things too seriously. People with too much invested in the world always get hurt. I’m telling you, you don’t look like yourself."
"I hold the world but as the world, Gratiano— And mine a sad one.","For me the world is just the world, Gratiano—a stage where every person has a part to play. I play a sad one."
"Let me play the fool. With mirth and laughter let old wrinkles come. And let my liver rather heat with wine Than my heart cool with mortifying groans. Sit like his grandsire cut in alabaster, Sleep when he wakes, and creep into the jaundice By being peevish? I tell thee what, Antonio— I love thee, and ’tis my love that speaks— Do cream and mantle like a standing pond, And do a willful stillness entertain With purpose to be dressed in an opinion Of wisdom, gravity, profound conceit, And when I ope my lips, let no dog bark!” O my Antonio, I do know of these That therefore only are reputed wise For saying nothing, when I am very sure Which, hearing them, would call their brothers fools. I’ll tell thee more of this another time. But fish not with this melancholy bait For this fool gudgeon, this opinion.— I’ll end my exhortation after dinner.","Then I’ll play the happy fool and get laugh lines on my face. I’d rather overload my liver with wine than starve my heart by denying myself fun. Why should any living man sit still like a statue? Why should he sleep when he’s awake? Why should he get ulcers from being crabby all the time? I love you, and I’m telling you this because I care about you, Antonio—there are men who always look serious. Their faces never move or show any expression, like stagnant ponds covered with scum. They’re silent and stern, and they think they’re wise and deep, important and respectable. When they talk, they think everybody else should keep quiet, and that even dogs should stop barking. I know a lot of men like that, Antonio. The only reason they’re considered wise is because they don’t say anything. I’m sure if they ever opened their mouths, everyone would see what fools they are. I’ll talk to you more about this some other time. In the meantime, cheer up. Don’t go around looking so glum. That’s my opinion, but what do I know? I’m a fool.—Let’s go, Lorenzo.—Goodbye for now. I’ll finish my lecture after dinner."
"Well, we will leave you then till dinnertime. I must be one of these same dumb wise men, For Gratiano never lets me speak.","All right, we’ll see you at dinnertime. I must be one of these silent so-called wise men Gratiano’s talking about, because he never lets me get a word in."
Thou shalt not know the sound of thine own tongue.,"If you hang around me for two more years, you’ll forget the sound of your own voice. I won’t ever let you speak."
Farewell. I’ll grow a talker for this gear.,"Goodbye. After that lecture of yours, I’ll start talking a lot."
"Thanks, i' faith, for silence is only commendable In a neat’s tongue dried and a maid not vendible.",Thank you. The only tongues that should be silent are ox-tongues on a dinner plate and those that belong to old maids.
Is that any thing now?,Is he right?
"Gratiano speaks an infinite deal of nothing, more than any man in all Venice. His reasons are as two grains of wheat hid in two bushels of chaff—you shall seek all day ere you find them, and when you have them they are not worth the search.","Gratiano talks more nonsense than any other man in Venice. His point is always like a needle in a haystack—you look for it all day, and when you find it you realize it wasn’t worth the trouble."
"Well, tell me now what lady is the same To whom you swore a secret pilgrimage, That you today promised to tell me of?","So, who’s this girl, the one you said you were going to take a special trip for? You promised to tell me."
"'Tis not unknown to you, Antonio, By something showing a more swelling port Than my faint means would grant continuance. Nor do I now make moan to be abridged From such a noble rate. But my chief care","Antonio, you know how bad my finances have been lately. I’ve been living way beyond my means. Don’t get me wrong, I’m not complaining about having to cut back."
"Wherein my time something too prodigal Hath left me gaged. To you, Antonio, I owe the most in money and in love, And from your love I have a warranty How to get clear of all the debts I owe.","I just want to be honorable and pay off the big debts that piled up when I was living the high life. I’m in debt to many people, and I owe most to you, Antonio—both money and gratitude. And because you care about me, I know you’ll let me tell you my plan to clear all my debts."
"I pray you, good Bassanio, let me know it. And if it stand, as you yourself still do, Within the eye of honor, be assured Lie all unlocked to your occasions.","Please let me know your plan, Bassanio. As long as it’s honorable, you can be sure that I’ll let you use all my money and do everything I can to help you."
"In my school days, when I had lost one shaft, I shot his fellow of the selfsame flight The selfsame way with more advisèd watch I oft found both. I urge this childhood proof Because what follows is pure innocence. I owe you much, and, like a willful youth, That which I owe is lost. But if you please Which you did shoot the first, I do not doubt, As I will watch the aim, or to find both Or bring your latter hazard back again And thankfully rest debtor for the first.","Back when I was a schoolboy, if I lost an arrow I would try to find it by shooting another arrow in the same direction, watching the second arrow more carefully than I had the first. By risking the second arrow, I’d often get both of them back. I’m telling you this story for a reason. I owe you a lot, and like a spoiled kid I’ve lost what I owe you. But if you’d be willing to shoot another arrow the same way you shot the first, I’ll watch your arrow more carefully this time. Either we’ll get back all the money I owe you, or else we’ll get back what you lend me this time, and I’ll just owe you what I already owe you."
"To wind about my love with circumstance. And out of doubt you do me now more wrong In making question of my uttermost Than if you had made waste of all I have. That in your knowledge may by me be done, And I am pressed unto it. Therefore speak.","You know me better than that. You’re wasting your breath. All of this talk means you have doubts about my friendship. That’s worse than if you bankrupted me. Just tell me what to do, and I’ll do it. Tell me."
"In Belmont is a lady richly left, And she is fair and—fairer than that word— I did receive fair speechless messages. Her name is Portia, nothing undervalued To Cato’s daughter, Brutus' Portia. Nor is the wide world ignorant of her worth, Renownèd suitors, and her sunny locks Hang on her temples like a golden fleece, Which makes her seat of Belmont Colchos' strand, And many Jasons come in quest of her. To hold a rival place with one of them, I have a mind presages me such thrift That I should questionless be fortunate!","There’s a girl in Belmont who’s inherited a huge amount of money, and she’s beautiful and—even better—she’s a good person. I think she likes me. Sometimes the expression on her face tells me she likes me. Her name is Portia. She’s as rich as that famous Roman heroine Portia, the daughter of Cato and wife of Brutus. Her wealth is world-famous. Famous and important men have come in from all over the world to try to marry her. The hair that hangs down on her forehead is like gold, calling every adventurer to Belmont like a gold rush. Antonio, if I only had enough money to hold my own against those suitors, I know I could win her!"
"Thou know’st that all my fortunes are at sea. To raise a present sum. Therefore go forth, Try what my credit can in Venice do— That shall be racked even to the uttermost To furnish thee to Belmont, to fair Portia. Where money is, and I no question make To have it of my trust or for my sake.","You know right now all my money’s tied up in that cargo that’s still at sea. I can’t give you the cash you need because I don’t have it. But go ahead and charge things to me on credit, as much credit as I can get in Venice. I’ll use all my lines of credit to help you get to Belmont, to Portia. Go see who will lend money, and I’ll do the same. I’m sure I can get something either as a business loan, or as a personal favor."
"By my troth, Nerissa, my little body is aweary of this great world.","Oh Nerissa, my poor little body is tired of this great big world."
"You would be, sweet madam, if your miseries were in the same abundance as your good fortunes are. And yet for aught I see, they are as sick that surfeit with too much as they that starve with nothing. It is no mean happiness, therefore, to be seated in the mean. Superfluity comes sooner by white hairs, but competency lives longer.","You’d be tired, madam, if you had bad luck rather than wealth and good luck. But as far as I can tell, people with too much suffer as much as people with nothing. The best way to be happy is to be in between. When you have too much you get old sooner, but having just enough helps you live longer."
"Good sentences, and well pronounced.","Good point, and well said."
They would be better if well followed.,It would be better if you actually applied it to your life.
"If to do were as easy as to know what were good to do, chapels had been churches and poor men’s cottages princes' palaces. It is a good divine that follows his own instructions. I can easier teach twenty what were good to be done than be one of the twenty to follow mine own teaching. The brain may devise laws for the blood, but a hot temper leaps o'er a cold decree. Such a hare is madness the youth—to skip o'er the meshes of good counsel the cripple. But this reasoning is not in the fashion to choose me a husband. O me, the word “choose!” I may neither choose whom I would nor refuse whom I dislike—so is the will of a living daughter curbed by the will of a dead father. Is it not hard, Nerissa, that I cannot choose one nor refuse none?","You think it’s that easy? If doing good deeds were as easy as knowing how to do them, then everyone would be better off. Small chapels would be big churches, and poor men’s cottages would be princes' palaces. It takes a good priest to practice what he preaches. For me, it’s easier to lecture twenty people on how to be good than to be the one person out of twenty who actually does good things. The brain can tell the heart what to do, but what does it matter? Cold rules don’t matter when you’ve got a hot temper. Young people are like frisky young rabbits, and good advice is like a crippled old man trying to catch them. But thinking like this won’t help me choose a husband. Oh, the word “choose” is strange! I can’t choose who I like, or refuse who I dislike. I’m a living daughter still controlled by the wishes of her dead father. Isn’t it a pain that I can’t choose or refuse anyone, Nerissa?"
"Your father was ever virtuous, and holy men at their death have good inspirations. Therefore the lottery that he hath devised in these three chests of gold, silver, and lead, whereof who chooses his meaning chooses you, will no doubt never be chosen by any rightly but one who shall rightly love. But what warmth is there in your affection towards any of these princely suitors that are already come?","Your father was an extremely moral man, and religious people get odd ideas on their deathbeds. Your father’s idea was to have a game with three boxes. The suitor who can figure out whether to pick the gold, silver, or lead box will solve your father’s riddle—and that suitor’s the man for you. No one will ever choose the right box who doesn’t deserve your love. But tell me. Do you like any of the princely suitors who’ve come?"
"I pray thee, overname them. And as thou namest them, I will describe them. And according to my description, level at my affection.","Run through the list. As you name them I’ll describe them for you, and from my descriptions you can guess how I feel toward them."
"First, there is the Neapolitan prince.","Well, first there was the prince from Naples."
"Ay, that’s a colt indeed, for he doth nothing but talk of his horse, and he makes it a great appropriation to his own good parts that he can shoe him himself. I am much afeard my lady his mother played false with a smith.","Ah, yes, that stallion. All he talks about is his horse. He thinks it’s a great credit to his character that he can shoe a horse all by himself. I’m afraid his mother may have had an affair with a blacksmith."
Then there is the County Palatine.,Then there’s the Count Palatine.
"He doth nothing but frown, as who should say, “An you will not have me, choose.” He hears merry tales and smiles not. I fear he will prove the weeping philosopher when he grows old, being so full of unmannerly sadness in his youth. I had rather be married to a death’s-head with a bone in his mouth than to either of these. God defend me from these two!","He does nothing but frown, as if he wants to say, “If you don’t want me, I don’t care.” He doesn’t even smile when he hears funny stories. If he’s so sad and solemn when he’s young, I can only imagine how much he’ll cry as an old man. No, I’d rather be married to a skull with a bone in its mouth than to either of those men. God protect me from these two!"
"How say you by the French lord, Monsieur le Bon?","What did you think about that French lord, Monsieur le Bon?"
"God made him and therefore let him pass for a man. In truth, I know it is a sin to be a mocker, but he!—why, he hath a horse better than the Neapolitan’s, a better bad habit of frowning than the Count Palatine. He is every man in no man. If a throstle sing, he falls straight a- capering. He will fence with his own shadow. If I should marry him, I should marry twenty husbands. If he would despise me I would forgive him, for if he love me to madness I shall never requite him.","We might as well call him a man, since God created him. No, I know it’s bad to make fun of people, but still! His horse is better than the Neapolitan’s and he frowns more than the Count Palatine. He was trying to outdo everyone so much that you couldn’t tell who he was. He started dancing every time a bird sang, and he was so eager to show off his fencing that he’d fight with his own shadow. If I married him, I might as well as marry twenty husbands, because he’s like twenty men all rolled into one! I’d understand it if he hated me, since even if he loved me desperately, I’d never be able to love him back."
"What say you then to Falconbridge, the young baron of","What about Falconbridge, that young English baron?"
"You know I say nothing to him, for he understands not me, nor I him. He hath neither Latin, French, nor Italian, and you will come into the court and swear that I have a poor pennyworth in the English. He is a proper man’s picture, but alas, who can converse with a dumb show? How oddly he is suited! I think he bought his doublet in Italy, his round hose in France, his bonnet in Germany, and his behavior everywhere.","I have no opinion about him. We don’t talk because we don’t understand each other. He doesn’t speak Latin, French, or Italian, and you know how little English I speak. He’s great-looking, but how can you talk to someone who doesn’t speak your language? He was dressed so oddly too! I think he got his jacket in Italy, his tights in France, his hat in Germany, and his behavior everywhere."
"What think you of the Scottish lord, his neighbor?","What do you think of his neighbor, the Scottish lord?"
"That he hath a neighborly charity in him, for he borrowed a box of the ear of the Englishman and swore he would pay him again when he was able. I think the Frenchman became his surety and sealed under for another.","I think he’s very forgiving, since he let the Englishman slap him on the ear without hitting him back. Rather than defend himself, he just threatened to pay the Englishman back later. Then the Frenchman promised to help the Scot pay the Englishman back, and added a slap of his own."
"How like you the young German, the Duke of Saxony’s nephew?","How did you like the young German, the duke of Saxony’s nephew?"
"Very vilely in the morning, when he is sober, and most vilely in the afternoon, when he is drunk. When he is best he is a little worse than a man, and when he is worst he is little better than a beast. And the worst fall that ever fell, I hope I shall make shift to go without him.","He’s pretty awful in the morning when he’s sobering up, and even worse in the afternoon when he’s drunk. At his best he’s a little less than a man, and at his worst he’s little more than an animal. If we got married and he tragically met his demise, I’m sure I could find a way to go on without him."
"If he should offer to choose and choose the right casket, you should refuse to perform your father’s will if you should refuse to accept him.","If he offers to play the game and chooses the right box, but then you reject him, you’ll be disobeying your father’s last wishes."
"Therefore, for fear of the worst, I pray thee, set a deep glass of rhenish wine on the contrary casket, for if the devil be within and that temptation without, I know he will choose it. I will do any thing, Nerissa, ere I’ll be married to a sponge.","I know. So please put a nice big glass of white wine on the wrong box. I know he’ll get tempted and choose that one. I’ll do anything rather than marry a drunk, Nerissa."
"You need not fear, lady, the having any of these lords. They have acquainted me with their determinations, which is indeed to return to their home and to trouble you with no more suit unless you may be won by some other sort than your father’s imposition depending on the caskets.","You don’t have to worry about any of these lords, my lady. They’ve all told me what they want, which is to go back home and give up on you—unless there was some other way to win you than your father’s pick-the-box test."
"If I live to be as old as Sibylla, I will die as chaste as Diana unless I be obtained by the manner of my father’s will. I am glad this parcel of wooers are so reasonable, for there is not one among them but I dote on his very absence. And I pray God grant them a fair departure.",I’ll die an old maid unless I can be won according to the rules set by my father’s will. I’m glad these suitors are sensible enough to stay away. The only thing I like about them is that they’re not there. I wish them all safe trips home.
"Do you not remember, lady, in your father’s time a Venetian, a scholar and a soldier, that came hither in company of the Marquess of Montferrat?",Do you remember a Venetian scholar and soldier who accompanied the marquess of Montferrat here once when your father was still alive?
"Yes, yes, it was Bassanio—as I think he was so called.","Yes, yes, that was Bassanio. I think that was his name."
"True, madam. He, of all the men that ever my foolish eyes looked upon, was the best deserving a fair lady.","Yes, madam, that’s the one. He deserves a beautiful wife more than all the other men I’ve ever seen."
"I remember him well, and I remember him worthy of thy praise.","I remember him well, and my memory tells me that he deserves your praise."
"How now, what news?","Hello, do you have any news?"
"The four strangers seek for you, madam, to take their leave. And there is a forerunner come from a fifth, the Prince of Morocco, who brings word the prince his master will be here tonight.","The four suitors are looking for you so they can say goodbye, madam. And there’s a messenger representing a fifth one, the prince of Morocco, who says the prince will be here tonight."
"If I could bid the fifth welcome with so good a heart as I can bid the other four farewell, I should be glad of his approach. If he have the condition of a saint and the complexion of a devil, I had rather he should shrive me than wive me. Come, Nerissa.—(to SERVANT) Sirrah, go before. Whiles we shut the gates upon one wooer Another knocks at the door.","If I could say hello to the fifth one as happily as I’ll say goodbye to the first four, I’d be very happy he’s coming. If he’s as good as a saint but is black like a devil, I’d rather he hear my confession than marry me. Let’s go, Nerissa.—(to the SERVANT) Go ahead. As soon as we shut the door on one suitor, another one starts knocking."
"Three thousand ducats, well.","Three thousand ducats, hmmm."
"Ay, sir, for three months.","Yes, for three months."
"For three months, well.","For three months, hmmm."
"For the which, as I told you, Antonio shall be bound.","As I said before, Antonio will guarantee the loan. If I default, he’ll pay you."
"Antonio shall become bound, well.","Antonio will guarantee it, hmmm."
May you stead me? Will you pleasure me? Shall I know your answer?,Can you help me? What’s your answer?
"Three thousand ducats for three months, and Antonio bound.","Three thousand ducats for three months, and Antonio will guarantee it."
Your answer to that?,Your answer?
Antonio is a good man.,Antonio’s a good man.
Have you heard any imputation to the contrary?,Have you heard anything to the contrary?
"Ho, no, no, no, no. My meaning in saying he is a good man is to have you understand me that he is sufficient. Yet his means are in supposition. He hath an argosy bound to Tripolis, another to the Indies. I understand moreover, upon the Rialto, he hath a third at Mexico, a fourth for England, and other ventures he hath squandered abroad.","What? No, no, no, no. What I meant in saying he’s a good man is that he has enough money to guarantee the loan. But his investments are uncertain right now. He has one ship bound for Tripoli, another heading for the Indies. What’s more, people at the Rialto The Rialto is the business district of Venice, where the merchants meet. Rialto tell me he has a third ship in Mexico, and a fourth in England, as well as other business ventures throughout the world."
"But ships are but boards, sailors but men. There be land rats and water rats, water thieves and land thieves—I mean pirates—and then there is the peril of waters, winds, and rocks. The man is notwithstanding sufficient.","But ships are just fragile boards, and sailors are just men. There are rats and thieves and pirates—not to mention storms, winds, and rocks. Anything could happen. But in spite of all this, the man is still wealthy enough. Three thousand ducats—I think I can let him guarantee your loan."
Be assured you may.,I assure you he can.
"I will be assured I may, and that I may be assured,","I will be sure he can, before I make the loan. And I’ll think of a way to be sure. Can I speak with Antonio?"
If it please you to dine with us.,"If you like, you can dine with us."
"Yes—to smell pork, to eat of the habitation which your prophet the Nazarite conjured the devil into. I will buy with you, sell with you, talk with you, walk with you, and so following, but I will not eat with you, drink with you, nor pray with you. What news on the Rialto? Who is he comes here?","Oh yes—to smell pork Any meat from pigs (like pork or bacon) is forbidden by Jewish dietary law. pork ? I don’t think so!. Your prophet Jesus sent the devil into a herd of pigs. I’m not going to eat that. I’ll buy with you, sell with you, talk with you, walk with you, and so on, but I won’t eat with you, drink with you, or pray with you. Any news on the Rialto? Who’s that?"
This is Signor Antonio.,This is Signor Antonio.
"(aside) How like a fawning publican he looks! I hate him for he is a Christian, He lends out money gratis and brings down The rate of usance here with us in Venice. If I can catch him once upon the hip, I will feed fat the ancient grudge I bear him. Even there where merchants most do congregate, On me, my bargains and my well-won thrift,","(to himself) He looks just like a guy who’s robbed me but now comes to beg me for a favor! I hate him because he’s a Christian. But more than that, I hate him because he stupidly lends money without interest, which lowers the interest rates here in Venice. If I can just get the upper hand of him once, I’ll satisfy my old grudge against him. He hates Jews. Even at the Rialto he’s always complaining about me and my negotiating and my hard-earned profits, which he calls “interest.”"
Which he calls “interest.” Cursèd be my tribe If I forgive him!,It would an insult to Jews everywhere to forgive that man!
"Shylock, do you hear?","Shylock, are you listening?"
"I am debating of my present store, And by the near guess of my memory I cannot instantly raise up the gross Of full three thousand ducats. What of that? Will furnish me. But soft! How many months Do you desire? (to ANTONIO) Rest you fair, good signor. Your worship was the last man in our mouths.","I’m thinking about how much cash I have on hand. If I remember correctly, I can’t raise the entire three thousand ducats immediately. But so what? Tubal, a wealthy Jew I know, will supply me with the cash. But wait a minute! How many months do you want? (to ANTONIO) Oh, hello, how are you, signor? We were just talking about you."
"By taking nor by giving of excess, Yet to supply the ripe wants of my friend, I’ll break a custom. (to BASSANIO) Is he yet possessed","Shylock, although I never lend or borrow with interest, I’m willing to break that habit to help a friend in need. (to BASSANIO) Does he know how much you need?"
"Ay, ay, three thousand ducats.","Oh yes, three thousand ducats."
And for three months.,For three months.
"I had forgot—three months. (to BASSANIO) You told me so. Well then, your bond, and let me see—But hear you, Methought you said you neither lend nor borrow Upon advantage.","Yes, I forgot—three months. (to BASSANIO) You told me that. (to ANTONIO) Now then, about your guarantee. Let me see—but listen, Antonio, I thought you said you don’t lend or borrow with interest."
I do never use it.,That’s right. That’s not how I do business.
"When Jacob grazed his uncle Laban’s sheep— As his wise mother wrought in his behalf, The third possessor, ay, he was the third—","When Jacob took care of his uncle Laban’s sheep—Jacob was the heir to his grandfather Abraham’s birthright, because his mother cleverly arranged for her husband Isaac to make Jacob his heir—"
And what of him? Did he take interest?,What’s your point? Did he charge interest?
"No, not take interest—not as you would say When Laban and himself were compromised That all the eanlings which were streaked and pied Should fall as Jacob’s hire, the ewes, being rank, In the end of autumn turnèd to the rams. Between these woolly breeders in the act, The skillful shepherd peeled me certain wands. And in the doing of the deed of kind He stuck them up before the fulsome ewes, Fall parti-colored lambs—and those were Jacob’s. This was a way to thrive, and he was blessed. And thrift is blessing, if men steal it not.","No, he didn’t charge interest Shylock uses a story of Jacob from Genesis : – to defend his practice of charging interest. charge interest —not in your sense of the word. But listen to what Jacob did. When he and Laban agreed that all the spotted lambs would be Jacob’s pay, it was the end of autumn, when the sheep were starting to mate. Because newborns look like whatever their mother sees during mating, he stuck some spotted branches into the ground right in front of the sheep, who saw them while they mated. The mothers later gave birth to spotted lambs, all of which went to Jacob. That was his way of expanding his business, and it worked. My point is that profit is a blessing, as long as you don’t steal to get it."
"This was a venture, sir, that Jacob served for— But swayed and fashioned by the hand of heaven. Was this inserted to make interest good? Or is your gold and silver ewes and rams?",That business venture you’re referring to happened because God made it happen like that. Jacob didn’t have any control over what happened. Are you saying this story proves that charging interest makes sense? That your interest payments are like Jacob’s sheep?
I cannot tell: I make it breed as fast.,"I can hardly tell the difference; I make my money multiply as fast as those sheep. But listen to me, signor—"
"Mark you this, Bassanio, The devil can cite Scripture for his purpose. An evil soul producing holy witness Is like a villain with a smiling cheek, A goodly apple rotten at the heart.","Watch out, Bassanio. The devil can quote Scripture for his own use. An evil soul using a holy story is like a criminal who smiles at you. He looks like a good apple but he’s rotten at the core. Oh, liars can look so honest!"
"Three thousand ducats—’tis a good round sum. Three months from twelve, then. Let me see. The rate—",Three thousand ducats. That’s a nice even sum. Three months from twelve months of the year. Let me see. The interest rate will be—
"Well, Shylock, shall we be beholding to you?","Well, Shylock? Are you going to loan us the money?"
"Signor Antonio, many a time and oft About my moneys and my usances. Still have I borne it with a patient shrug, For sufferance is the badge of all our tribe. You call me misbeliever, cutthroat dog, And all for use of that which is mine own. Well then, it now appears you need my help. Go to, then! You come to me and you say, “Shylock, we would have moneys.” You say so!— And foot me as you spurn a stranger cur Over your threshold! Moneys is your suit. What should I say to you? Should I not say, “Hath a dog money? Is it possible Shall I bend low and in a bondman’s key With bated breath and whispering humbleness Say this:","Signor Antonio, you’ve often insulted my money and my business practices in the Rialto. I have always just shrugged and put up with it because Jews are good at suffering. You called me a heathen, a dirty dog, and you spit on my Jewish clothes. And all because I use my own money to make a profit. And now it looks like you need my help. All right then. You come to me saying, “Shylock, we need money.” You say that!—even though you spat on my beard and kicked me like you’d kick a stray mutt out your front door. And now you’re asking for money. What can I tell you? Shouldn’t I say, “Does a dog have money? Is it possible for a mutt to lend three thousand ducats?” Or should I bend down low, and in a humble and submissive voice say:"
"“Fair sir, you spet on me on Wednesday last; You called me ’dog'—and for these courtesies I’ll lend you thus much moneys?”","“Sir, last Wednesday you spit on me. You insulted me on this day, and another time you called me a dog. And out of gratitude for these favors, I’ll be happy to lend you the money?”"
"I am as like to call thee so again, To spet on thee again, to spurn thee too. As to thy friends, for when did friendship take A breed for barren metal of his friend? But lend it rather to thine enemy, Who, if he break, thou mayst with better face","I’ll probably call you those names again and spit on you, and reject you again too. If you’re going to lend us this money, don’t lend it to us as if we were your friends. When did friends charge interest? Instead, lend it to me as your enemy. If your enemy goes bankrupt, it’s easier for you to take your penalty from him."
"Why, look you how you storm! I would be friends with you and have your love, Forget the shames that you have stained me with, Supply your present wants and take no doit Of usance for my moneys—and you’ll not hear me!","Look at you getting all riled up! I want to be friends with you, and forget all the times you’ve embarrassed and humiliated me. I want to give you what you need, and not charge a penny of interest—but you won’t listen to me! I’m making a kind offer—zero percent financing."
This were kindness.,That really would be kind.
"This kindness will I show. Go with me to a notary, seal me there Your single bond, and—in a merry sport— If you repay me not on such a day, Expressed in the condition, let the forfeit Be nominated for an equal pound Of your fair flesh, to be cut off and taken In what part of your body pleaseth me.","I’ll show you how kind I am. Come with me to a notary and we’ll make it official. And let’s add a little clause just for a joke. If you don’t repay me on the day we agree on, in the place we name, for the sum of money fixed in our contract, your penalty will be a pound of your pretty flesh, to be cut off and taken out of whatever part of your body I like."
And say there is much kindness in the Jew.,It’s a deal. I’ll agree to those terms and even say that Jews are nice.
You shall not seal to such a bond for me! I’ll rather dwell in my necessity.,"No, you can’t sign a contract like that for me! I’d rather go without the money."
"Why, fear not, man. I will not forfeit it. This bond expires—I do expect return Of thrice three times the value of this bond.","Don’t worry about it, man, I won’t have to pay any penalty. In two months—a month before this loan is due—I expect to earn more than three times that much from my investments."
"O Father Abram, what these Christians are, Whose own hard dealings teaches them suspect If he should break his day, what should I gain By the exaction of the forfeiture? A pound of man’s flesh taken from a man Is not so estimable, profitable neither, To buy his favor I extend this friendship. If he will take it, so. If not, adieu. And for my love I pray you wrong me not.","Oh father Abraham, what kind of people are these Christians? Their own meanness teaches them to suspect other people!—Please tell me this. If he fails to repay me by the deadline, what would I get out of such a penalty? A pound of human flesh taken isn’t even as valuable as a pound of mutton or beef. I’m just offering this as a favor to a friend. If he agrees, great. If not, goodbye. And I hope you won’t think badly of me."
"Yes, Shylock, I will seal unto this bond.","Yes, Shylock, I’ll sign the contract and agree to its terms."
"Give him direction for this merry bond, And I will go and purse the ducats straight, See to my house left in the fearful guard Of an unthrifty knave, and presently","Then meet me right away at the notary’s. Give him the instructions for our amusing little contract, and I’ll go get the money for you right away. I need to check in at home first, because one of my careless servants is in charge right now. I’ll see you soon."
"Hie thee, gentle Jew.","Hurry up, my Jewish friend."
The Hebrew will turn Christian. He grows kind.,He’s so kind you’d think the Jew is turning Christian.
I like not fair terms and a villain’s mind.,I don’t like it when a villain acts nice.
Come on. In this there can be no dismay.,"Come on, there’s no reason to worry. My ships will come home a month before the money is due."
"Mislike me not for my complexion, The shadowed livery of the burnished sun, To whom I am a neighbor and near bred. Bring me the fairest creature northward born, And let us make incision for your love To prove whose blood is reddest, his or mine. I tell thee, lady, this aspect of mine Hath feared the valiant. By my love I swear Have loved it too. I would not change this hue Except to steal your thoughts, my gentle queen.","Don’t hold my skin color against me. I was born and raised in the sun, which is why I’m dark-skinned. But I’m as red-blooded as any man. Show me the best-looking person born in the freezing north, where the sun barely thaws the icicles. I’ll win your love by cutting myself to prove to you I have redder blood than he does. I’m telling you, madam, my skin color has made brave men fear me and Moroccan girls love me. I wouldn’t change it except to make you think of me, my darling queen."
"In terms of choice I am not solely led By nice direction of a maiden’s eyes. Bars me the right of voluntary choosing. But if my father had not scanted me And hedged me by his wit to yield myself His wife who wins me by that means I told you, As any comer I have looked on yet For my affection.","Being good-looking isn’t the only way to my heart, you know. I have other criteria for choosing a husband. Not that it matters, because the box test takes away my free choice anyway. But if my father hadn’t restricted me like this—forcing me to marry whoever wins his test—then you’d have had as good a chance to marry me as any of the suitors I’ve met so far, prince."
"Even for that I thank you. Therefore I pray you lead me to the caskets To try my fortune. By this scimitar That won three fields of Sultan Solyman, I would o'erstare the sternest eyes that look, Outbrave the heart most daring on the earth, Pluck the young sucking cubs from the she-bear, To win the lady. But, alas the while! If Hercules and Lychas play at dice Which is the better man, the greater throw May turn by fortune from the weaker hand. And so may I, blind fortune leading me, Miss that which one unworthier may attain And die with grieving.","Thank you for saying that. Show me the caskets and let me try my luck. I swear by my sword, which killed the Shah of Persia and a Persian prince and defeated the Sultan Suleiman three times, that I would face the meanest-looking warriors on earth. I would act braver than the bravest man on earth. I would grab bear cubs from a ferocious mother bear, or tease a hungry lion—all of this in order to win your love, lady. But this is bad! If the hero Hercules and his servant Lychas rolled the dice, which would win? Not the greater hero. Just the one who happened to be luckier that time. And just as Hercules could be beaten by his servant, blind luck could make me lose this test and make someone worse than me win. If that happened, I’d die of sadness."
"You must take your chance, And either not attempt to choose at all Never to speak to lady afterward In way of marriage. Therefore be advised.","You have to take your chances. Either don’t choose at all, or swear beforehand that if you choose incorrectly you’ll never talk about marriage to any woman again. Think about it carefully."
"Nor will not. Come, bring me unto my chance.","Fine, I swear I won’t ever get married if I choose incorrectly. Let me take my chances."
"First, forward to the temple. After dinner",Let’s go to the temple first. You can take your chances after dinner.
Good fortune then!— To make me blessed or cursed’st among men.,I’ll try my luck then. I’ll either be the luckiest or the unluckiest man alive.
"Certainly my conscience will serve me to run from this Jew, my master. The fiend is at mine elbow and tempts me, saying to me, “Gobbo,” “Launcelot Gobbo,” “Good Launcelot,” or “Good Gobbo,” or “Good Launcelot Gobbo” —“use your legs, take the start, run away.” My conscience says, “No. Take heed, honest Launcelot. Take heed, honest Gobbo,” or as aforesaid, “Honest Launcelot Gobbo, do not run. Scorn running with thy heels.” Well, the most courageous fiend bids me pack. “Fia!” says the fiend. “Away!” says the fiend. “For the heavens, rouse up a brave mind,” says the fiend, “and run.” Well, my conscience, hanging about the neck of my heart, says very wisely to me, “My honest friend Launcelot, being an honest man’s son”—or rather an honest woman’s son, for indeed my father did something smack, something grow to. He had a kind of taste.—Well, my conscience says, “Launcelot, budge not.” “Budge!” says the fiend. “Budge not,” says my conscience. “Conscience,” say I, “you counsel well.” “Fiend,” say I, “you counsel well.” To be ruled by my conscience I should stay with the Jew my master, who, God bless the mark, is a kind of devil. And to run away from the Jew I should be ruled by the fiend, who, saving your reverence, is the devil himself. Certainly the Jew is the very devil incarnation. And in my conscience, my conscience is but a kind of hard conscience, to offer to counsel me to stay with the Jew. The fiend gives the more friendly counsel. I will run, fiend. My heels are at your command. I will run.","I’m sure I’ll feel guilty if I run away from this Jew, my master. The devil’s on my shoulder, tempting me. He’s saying, “Gobbo,” “Launcelot Gobbo,” “Good Launcelot,” or “Good Gobbo,” or “Good Launcelot Gobbo”—“use your legs and run away.” But my conscience says, “No, Launcelot, calm down, don’t run away.” The devil’s urging me to leave. “Go away!” he says. “Run away! Be tough,” says the devil, “and run!” But then my conscience, hanging around my heart, says very wisely to me, “My good friend Launcelot, you’re a good boy, the son of an honest man,” really, that should be the son of an honest woman, since my father cheated on my mother. Anyway, my conscience says, “Stay put.” “Go,” the devil says. “Don’t go,” says my conscience. “Conscience,” I say, “you give good advice.” “Devil,” I say, “you give good advice.” If I listened to my conscience, I’d stay with the Jew my master, who’s a devil. But if I ran away from the Jew, I’d be following the advice of the devil, who’s the very devil himself. Certainly the Jew is the devil incarnate, and my conscience is giving me a hard time by telling me to stay with the Jew. The devil’s advice is nicer. I’ll run, devil. Tell me to run, and I’ll run."
"Master young man, you, I pray you, which is the way to","Excuse me, young man, how do I get to the Jew’s residence?"
"(aside) O heavens, this is my true-begotten father, who, being more than sand-blind—high-gravel blind—knows me not. I will try confusions with him.","(to himself) Good heavens, it’s my father. He doesn’t recognize me because he’s half-blind—or more than half-blind, somewhere between half-blind and totally blind. I’ll play a little game with him."
"Master young gentleman, I pray you, which is the way to","Young man, excuse me, how do I get to the Jew’s?"
"Turn up on your right hand at the next turning, but at the next turning of all on your left. Marry, at the very next turning turn of no hand, but turn down indirectly to the Jew’s house.","Turn right at the next turn, but at the following turn, turn left. Oh, and then at the very next turn, don’t turn left or right, but turn down and around to the Jew’s house."
"By God’s sonties, ’twill be a hard way to hit. Can you tell me whether one Launcelot that dwells with him, dwell with him or no?","Good heavens, those are difficult directions. Can you tell me if a man named Launcelot, who lives with him, is still there?"
Talk you of young Master Launcelot? (aside) Mark me now. Now will I raise the waters.—Talk you of young Master Launcelot?,"Are you talking about young Master Launcelot? (speaking so no one else can hear) Watch out, I’m going to pull a good prank here.—Is that who you’re talking about?"
"No “master,” sir, but a poor man’s son. His father, though I say ’t, is an honest exceeding poor man and, God be thanked, well to live.","He’s not a “master,” sir, he’s just a poor man’s son. His father, if I do say so myself, is an honest but very poor man, and, thank God, likely to live a long time."
"Well, let his father be what he will, we talk of young","Well, his father can be whatever he wants to be. We’re talking about young Master Launcelot."
"Your worship’s friend and Launcelot, sir.","Please don’t call him that, sir. He’s just Launcelot."
"But I pray you, ergo, old man, ergo, I beseech you, talk you of young Master Launcelot?","But excuse me, ergo, old man, ergo, I’m asking you if you’re talking about young Master Launcelot."
"Of Launcelot, an ’t please your mastership.","Yes, I’m talking about Launcelot, sir."
"Ergo, Master Launcelot. Talk not of Master Launcelot, Father, for the young gentleman, according to Fates and Destinies and such odd sayings, the Sisters Three and such branches of learning, is indeed deceased, or as you would say in plain terms, gone to heaven.","Ergo “Ergo” means “therefore” in Latin. Launcelot is using the word to prove he’s an educated gentleman but seems to have no idea what it means. Ergo , Master Launcelot. But please don’t talk about Master Launcelot, old man. The young gentleman, submitting to the fates, the three sisters who control destiny, and other branches of learning like that, is deceased. Or, to put it in plain language, he’s gone to heaven."
"Marry, God forbid! The boy was the very staff of my age, my very prop.","Oh, no. God forbid! The boy was going to support me in my old age!"
"Do I look like a cudgel or a hovel-post, a staff or a prop? Do you know me, Father?","What am I, a cane? How could I support anyone? Don’t you recognize me, father?"
"Alack the day, I know you not, young gentleman. But I pray you, tell me, is my boy, God rest his soul, alive or dead?","Heaven help me, I don’t know you, sir. But please tell me, is my boy—God rest his soul—alive or dead?"
"Do you not know me, Father?","You really don’t recognize me, father?"
"Alack, sir, I am sand-blind. I know you not.","Sir, I’m half-blind. I don’t know you."
"Nay, indeed if you had your eyes, you might fail of the knowing me. It is a wise father that knows his own child. Well, old man, I will tell you news of your son. Give me your blessing. Truth will come to light. Murder cannot be hid long—a man’s son may, but in the end truth will out.","Even if you had your eyes, you still might not recognize me. It takes a wise father to know his own child. Well, old man, I’ll tell you news of your son. Give me your blessing. The truth will come to light, and murder can’t be hidden long—a man’s son may hide, but truth will always come out."
"Pray you, sir, stand up. I am sure you are not Launcelot, my boy.","Please stand up! I’m sure you aren’t Launcelot, my boy."
"Pray you, let’s have no more fooling about it, but give me your blessing. I am Launcelot, your boy that was, your son that is, your child that shall be.","Come on, quit fooling around. Give me your blessing. I’m Launcelot, who was your boy, is your son, and will be your child."
I cannot think you are my son.,I can’t believe you’re my son.
"I know not what I shall think of that. But I am Launcelot, the Jew’s man, and I am sure Margery your wife is my mother.","I don’t know what to say to that, but the fact is I’m Launcelot, the Jew’s servant, and Margery, your wife, is my mother."
"Her name is Margery, indeed. I’ll be sworn, if thou be Launcelot, thou art mine own flesh and blood. (feels the back of LAUNCELOT’s head) Lord worshipped might he be, what a beard hast thou got! Thou hast got more hair on thy chin than Dobbin my fill-horse has on his tail.","Yes, you’re right, her name is Margery. If you’re Launcelot, then you’re my own flesh and blood. (feels the back of LAUNCELOT’s head) My Lord, what a bushy beard you have! You’ve got more hair on your chin than Dobbin my horse has in his tail."
It should seem then that Dobbin’s tail grows backward. I am sure he had more hair of his tail than I have of my face when I last saw him.,Then Dobbin’s tail must be growing backward. I’m sure he had more hair on his tail than I have on my face when I last saw him.
"Lord, how art thou changed! How dost thou and thy master agree? I have brought him a present. How 'gree you now?","Lord, how you’ve changed! How are you and your master getting along? I’ve brought him a present. How are you?"
"Well, well, but for mine own part, as I have set up my rest to run away, so I will not rest till I have run some ground. My master’s a very Jew. Give him a present. Give him a halter. I am famished in his service. You may tell every finger I have with my ribs. Father, I am glad you are come. Give me your present to one Master Bassanio, who indeed gives rare new liveries.","I’m all right. But I’ve decided to run away, and I can’t wait to get going. My master’s a total Jew. You’re giving him a present? Give him a noose to hang himself. He’s starving me to death. You can see my ribs so well you can count them. I’m glad you’ve come, father. Give me your present to give to Master Bassanio. He gives his servants beautiful new uniforms."
"If I serve not him, I will run as far as God has any ground.—O rare fortune! Here comes the man.—To him, Father, for I am a Jew if I serve the Jew any longer.","If I can’t get a job with him, I’ll run away to the ends of the earth.—Oh look, this is lucky, here comes Master Bassanio now.—Let’s go talk to him, Father. If I work for the Jew Launcelot uses the word “Jew” as a term of abuse here. Jew any longer, you can just call me a Jew."
"(to a follower) You may do so, but let it be so hasted that supper be ready at the farthest by five of the clock. See these letters delivered, put the liveries to making, and desire Gratiano to come anon to my lodging.","(to an attendant) All right, go ahead. But do everything quickly. Supper must be ready at five at the latest. Make sure these letters get delivered, get the uniforms made, and tell Gratiano to come visit me soon."
"To him, Father.","Go talk to him, father."
(to BASSANIO) God bless your worship!,"(to BASSANIO) God bless you, sir!"
Gramercy! Wouldst thou aught with me?,Thank you. What do you want with me?
"Here’s my son, sir, a poor boy—","This is my son, sir. He’s a poor boy—"
"Not a poor boy, sir, but the rich Jew’s man that would, sir, as my father shall specify—","Not a poor boy, but the rich Jew’s servant, who wants, as my father will explain—"
"He hath a great infection, sir, as one would say, to serve—","He wants very much, sir, as one might say, to work for—"
"Indeed the short and the long is, I serve the Jew and have a desire, as my father shall specify—","To put it briefly, I work for the Jew, and I want, as my father will tell you—"
"His master and he, saving your worship’s reverence, are scarce cater-cousins—",He and his master aren’t exactly friends—
"To be brief, the very truth is that the Jew, having done me wrong, doth cause me, as my father, being, I hope, an old man, shall frutify unto you—","To be brief, the truth is that the Jew has done me wrong, and that forces me to—as my father, an old man, will inform you—"
"I have here a dish of doves that I would bestow upon your worship, and my suit is—","I have a present I’d like to give you, sir. And I want to request that—"
"In very brief, the suit is impertinent to myself, as your worship shall know by this honest old man—and though I say it, though old man, yet poor man, my father—","To make a long story short, the request is about me, as this good old man will tell you. Even though I’m his son and I’m the one saying it, this old man is a poor man—"
One speak for both. What would you?,One of you do the talking. What do you want?
"Serve you, sir.","To work for you, sir."
"That is the very defect of the matter, sir.","That’s what we’re trying to say, sir."
"I know thee well. Thou hast obtained thy suit. And hath preferred thee, if it be preferment To leave a rich Jew’s service, to become The follower of so poor a gentleman.","I know who you are. You can have what you want. I spoke with your master Shylock today, and he recommended you to me. If you want to leave a rich Jew to work for a poor gentleman, you’re welcome to."
"The old proverb is very well parted between my master Shylock and you, sir—you have “the grace of God,” sir, and he hath “enough.”","Do you know the old proverb “The grace of God is enough,” sir? It could be divided between you and my boss Shylock—you have “the grace of God,” and he has “enough.”"
"Thou speak’st it well.—Go, father, with thy son.— Take leave of thy old master and inquire My lodging out.— Give him a livery More guarded than his fellows'. See it done.","Nicely put.—Go with your son, old man.—Say goodbye to your old master and find your way to my house. (to attendants) Give him a uniform that’s a little nicer than the others. Make sure it gets done."
"Father, in. I cannot get a service, no. I have ne'er a tongue in my head. (reading his own palm) Well, if any man in Italy have a fairer table which doth offer to swear upon a book, I shall have good fortune. Go to, here’s a simple line of life. Here’s a small trifle of wives. Alas, fifteen wives is nothing! Eleven widows and nine maids is a simple coming-in for one man. And then to ’scape drowning thrice and to be in peril of my life with the edge of a feather-bed—here are simple ’scapes. Well, if Fortune be a woman, she’s a good wench for this gear.—Father, come. I’ll take my leave of the Jew in the twinkling.","Father, go ahead. I can’t get a job, can I? I can’t talk well, no. (reading his own palm) If any man in Italy has a palm good enough to swear on a Bible with, it’s me. I’ve got very good luck! Here’s my life line. It shows a few wives—fifteen wives is nothing. Eleven widows and nine maids is a humble beginning for one man. It seems I’ll almost drown three times, and my life will be in danger when I’m caught in bed with another man’s wife! But these little lines are the escape routes I can take to get out of that one. If luck’s a lady, she’s good at this business. Father, let’s go. I’ll leave the Jew behind in the blink of an eye."
"I pray thee, good Leonardo, think on this. These things being bought and orderly bestowed, My best esteemed acquaintance. Hie thee, go.","BASSANIO Please, Leonardo, think about this (he hands him a piece of paper). These things have been bought and are ready. Hurry back here. I’m having dinner tonight with someone I greatly respect. Go now."
My best endeavours shall be done herein.,I’ll do my best.
(to LEONARDO) Where is your master?,(to LEONARDO) Where’s your master?
"Yonder, sir, he walks.","He’s walking over there, sir."
Signor Bassanio!,Signor Bassanio!
Gratiano!,Gratiano!
I have a suit to you.,I have a favor to ask.
You have obtained it.,Anything.
You must not deny me. I must go with you to Belmont.,Don’t say no. Let me go with you to Belmont.
"Why, then you must. But hear thee, Gratiano. Thou art too wild, too rude and bold of voice— Parts that become thee happily enough But where thou art not known, why, there they show Something too liberal. Pray thee, take pain To allay with some cold drops of modesty Thy skipping spirit, lest through thy wild behavior And lose my hopes.","Well, if you have to go, you have to go. But listen to me, Gratiano. Sometimes you get a bit too wild, and you let your voice get a bit loud and rude. These things look good on you, of course, and to people like you and me there’s nothing wrong with it. But in places where people don’t know you, your behavior might seem too wild. Please, try to act a little more serious, or the people in Belmont will get the wrong impression about me, and your wildness will make me blow my chance with Portia."
"Signor Bassanio, hear me. If I do not put on a sober habit, Talk with respect and swear but now and then, Wear prayer books in my pocket, look demurely— Thus with my hat, and sigh and say, “Amen”— Use all the observance of civility Like one well studied in a sad ostent To please his grandam, never trust me more.","Listen, Signor Bassanio, there’s nothing to worry about. I’ll be solemn-looking, I’ll talk with respect, and I’ll only swear once in a while. I’ll carry prayer books in my pocket and look sweet—even more. While grace is being said, I’ll be modest and say “amen”—I’ll watch my manners as if I’m trying to please my grandma. If I don’t do all this, never trust me again."
"Well, we shall see your bearing.","Well, we’ll see how you act."
"Nay, but I bar tonight. You shall not gauge me By what we do tonight.","Okay, but tonight doesn’t count. You can’t judge me based on what I do tonight."
"No, that were pity. I would entreat you rather to put on Your boldest suit of mirth, for we have friends I have some business.","No, it’d be a shame for you to act serious tonight. I’d rather see you having fun, because we have friends coming who want to have fun. Anyway, I have to say goodbye to you now. I’ve got some business to take care of."
And I must to Lorenzo and the rest. But we will visit you at supper time.,"I have to join Lorenzo and the others, but we’ll visit you at supper time."
"I am sorry thou wilt leave my father so. Our house is hell, and thou, a merry devil, Didst rob it of some taste of tediousness. But fare thee well, there is a ducat for thee. Lorenzo, who is thy new master’s guest. Give him this letter. (gives LAUNCELOT a letter) Do it secretly. And so farewell. I would not have my father","I’m sorry you’re leaving my father like this. It’s hell in our house, and you helped cheer it up, like a funny devil. But goodbye. Here’s a ducat for you. You’ll soon be meeting Lorenzo at supper; he’ll be a guest of your new master. Give him this letter. (gives LAUNCELOT a letter) Do it secretly. Goodbye. I don’t want my father to see me talking to you."
"Adieu! Tears exhibit my tongue. Most beautiful pagan, most sweet Jew! If a Christian do not play the knave and get thee, I am much deceived. But adieu. These foolish drops do something drown my manly spirit. Adieu.","Goodbye. My tears show you my feelings, my beautiful pagan, my sweet Jew! I’m sure some Christian will resort to trickery to get you. But goodbye. It’s not manly to cry. Goodbye."
"Farewell, good Launcelot.","Goodbye, Launcelot."
"Alack, what heinous sin is it in me To be ashamed to be my father’s child! But though I am a daughter to his blood, I am not to his manners. O Lorenzo, Become a Christian and thy loving wife.","Oh God, what a heinous sinner I am, being ashamed to be my father’s child! But I need to remember I’m related to him by blood, not behavior. Oh Lorenzo, if you keep your promise to me, I’ll end this agony by becoming a Christian and marrying you."
"Nay, we will slink away in supper time, Disguise us at my lodging, and return, All in an hour.","No, we’ll sneak away at supper time, disguise ourselves with masks at my house, and come back in an hour."
We have not made good preparation.,But we haven’t made any preparations.
We have not spoke us yet of torchbearers.,We haven’t even talked about who’ll be our torchbearers.
"'Tis vile, unless it may be quaintly ordered, And better in my mind not undertook.",The masquerade party might turn out terribly if we don’t manage things carefully. I think it’s better to call it off.
'Tis now but four o'clock. We have two hours To furnish us.,It’s only four o'clock now. We have two hours to get ready.
"Friend Launcelot, what’s the news?","Launcelot, what’s going on?"
"(giving LORENZO the letter) An it shall please you to break up this, it shall seem to signify.","(he gives LORENZO the letter) If you don’t mind opening this letter, you can find out for yourself."
"I know the hand. In faith, ’tis a fair hand, And whiter than the paper it writ on",I recognize the handwriting. It’s beautiful handwriting. And the beautiful hand that wrote this letter is whiter than the paper it’s written on.
"Love news, in faith?",I bet it’s a love letter!
"(to LORENZO) By your leave, sir.","(to LORENZO) May I be excused, sir?"
Whither goest thou?,Where are you going?
"Marry, sir, to bid my old master the Jew to sup tonight with my new master the Christian.","To invite my former boss, the Jew, to dine tonight with my new master, the Christian."
"Hold here, take this. Tell gentle Jessica I will not fail her. Speak it privately.— Go, gentlemen, Will you prepare you for this masque tonight?","(he gives LAUNCELOT money) Hold on, take this. Tell Jessica I won’t fail her. Tell her in private.—Go, gentlemen, get ready for the masquerade tonight. I have someone who can be my torchbearer."
"Ay, marry, I’ll be gone about it straight.","All right, I’ll go get things ready."
And so will I.,Me too.
Meet me and Gratiano At Gratiano’s lodging some hour hence.,Meet me and Gratiano at his house in about an hour.
'Tis good we do so.,It’s good we’re doing this.
Was not that letter from fair Jessica?,Wasn’t that letter from Jessica?
"I must needs tell thee all. She hath directed How I shall take her from her father’s house, What gold and jewels she is furnished with, What page’s suit she hath in readiness. It will be for his gentle daughter’s sake. And never dare Misfortune cross her foot Unless she do it under this excuse: That she is issue to a faithless Jew. (gives GRATIANO the letter) Peruse this as thou goest. Fair Jessica shall be my torchbearer.","I have to tell you everything. She’s told me how I can get her out of her father’s house. She’s also told me what gold and jewels she owns, and she’s described the page’s A page is a young male servant. page’s uniform she’s keeping to wear as a disguise. If her father ever goes to heaven, it’ll be because his daughter’s so good. She’ll never be punished with bad luck—unless it’s because her father is an unbelieving Jew. Come with me. (gives GRATIANO the letter) You can look this letter over as you go. Beautiful Jessica will be my torchbearer."
"Well, thou shalt see, thy eyes shall be thy judge, The difference of old Shylock and Bassanio.— What, Jessica!—Thou shalt not gormandize As thou hast done with me.—What, Jessica!— Why, Jessica, I say!","Well, you’ll see it with your own eyes. You’ll see the difference between working for Shylock and working for Bassanio.—(calling for his daughter) Jessica!—You won’t eat like a pig like you used to do at my place.—Jessica!—And sleep, and snore, and wear your clothes out.—Jessica, I’m calling you!"
"Why, Jessica!",Jessica!
Who bids thee call? I do not bid thee call.,Who asked you to call her? I’m not asking you to call her.
Your worship was wont to tell me that I could do nothing without bidding.,You always loved to tell me I couldn’t do anything without being told.
Call you? What is your will?,Did you call me? Do you need something?
"I am bid forth to supper, Jessica. There are my keys.—But wherefore should I go? I am not bid for love. They flatter me. But yet I’ll go in hate to feed upon Look to my house. I am right loath to go. There is some ill a-brewing towards my rest, For I did dream of money bags tonight.","I’ve been invited to supper, Jessica. Here are my keys.—But why should I go? I wasn’t invited because they like me. They’re just flattering me. But I’ll go out of spite, to feed off the wasteful Christian.—Jessica, my girl, watch the house. I don’t feel like going. Things aren’t going my way right now. I know because I dreamed of money bags last night."
"I beseech you, sir, go. My young master doth expect your reproach.","Please go, sir. My new master is expecting your approach."
So do I his.,And I’m expecting his reproach.
"And they have conspired together. I will not say you shall see a masque, but if you do then it was not for nothing that my nose fell a-bleeding on Black Monday last at six o'clock i' th' morning falling out that year on Ash Wednesday was four year in th' afternoon.","And they’ve been plotting things together. I’m not saying you’ll get a masquerade party, but if you do, I predicted it. I knew there would be a masquerade when I got that bad omen of a bloody nose last Easter Monday, at six in the morning, four years after I got the same kind of bloody nose on Ash Wednesday, in the afternoon."
"What, are there masques? Hear you me, Jessica. Lock up my doors, and when you hear the drum And the vile squealing of the wry-necked fife, Nor thrust your head into the public street To gaze on Christian fools with varnished faces. But stop my house’s ears—I mean my casements— Let not the sound of shallow foppery enter I have no mind of feasting forth tonight. But I will go.—Go you before me, sirrah. Say I will come.","What, there’s going to be a masquerade? Listen to me, Jessica, lock my doors up, and when you hear the drum and the nasty squealing of the flute, don’t climb up to the windows. Don’t stick your head out into the public street to stare at the Christian fools with painted faces. Block up my house’s ears—I mean the windows. Don’t let the noise of shallow fools enter my serious house. I swear, I’m in no mood to go out to dinner tonight, but I’ll go anyway.—Launcelot, go tell them I’ll come."
"I will go before, sir.— Mistress, look out at window, for all this. Will be worth a Jewess' eye.","I’ll go ahead of you, sir. (to JESSICA) Mistress, be on the lookout when you’re staring out the window. A Christian’s coming who’ll be worth a Jewess’s glance."
"What says that fool of Hagar’s offspring, ha?","What did that gentile fool say to you, hmmm?"
"His words were, “Farewell, mistress.” Nothing else.","He said “Goodbye, madam,” and nothing else."
"The patch is kind enough, but a huge feeder, More than the wildcat. Drones hive not with me. Therefore I part with him, and part with him To one that would have him help to waste His borrowed purse. Well, Jessica, go in. Do as I bid you. Shut doors after you. Fast bind, fast find. A proverb never stale in thrifty mind.","The fool’s nice enough, but he’s such a huge eater, and slow as a snail when he works. He sleeps all day like a cat. Bees that don’t work can’t stay in my hive, so I’m letting him go, handing him off so he can waste money for his new boss, the man who borrowed money from me. Anyway, Jessica, go inside. I might come back soon. Do as I told you. Shut the doors after you. As the saying goes, lock things up, and you’ll get to keep them."
"Farewell, and if my fortune be not crost,","Goodbye. If luck’s with me, I’ll lose a father, and you’ll lose a daughter."
This is the penthouse under which Lorenzo Desired us to make stand.,This is the roof under which Lorenzo said to meet him.
His hour is almost past.,He’s late.
"And it is marvel he outdwells his hour, For lovers ever run before the clock.","Yes, and that’s surprising, because lovers are usually early."
To seal love’s bonds new made than they are wont To keep obligèd faith unforfeited.,"Yes, for new lovers time passes ten times faster than for couples who’ve been married forever."
"That ever holds. Who riseth from a feast With that keen appetite that he sits down? His tedious measures with the unbated fire That he did pace them first? All things that are, Are with more spirit chasèd than enjoyed. How like a younger or a prodigal Hugged and embraèd by the strumpet wind! How like the prodigal doth she return, With overweathered ribs and ragged sails Lean, rent, and beggared by the strumpet wind!","That’s always true. Who gets up from a meal with the same appetite he had when he sat down? Can any horse retrace his footsteps with the same energy he had when he walked them the first time? We chase everything in life more excitedly than we actually enjoy it when we get it. It’s like when a ship sails out of the harbor with all its flags waving, gently pushed by the wind. When that ship returns, her timber is all weather-beaten and her sails are ragged. That same wind makes the ship thin and poor."
Here comes Lorenzo. More of this hereafter.,Here comes Lorenzo. We’ll talk about this later.
"Sweet friends, your patience for my long abode. Not I but my affairs have made you wait. When you shall please to play the thieves for wives, I’ll watch as long for you then. Approach.","My dear friends, thanks for your patience. I had business that made me late. When you have to steal your own wives some day, I’ll wait for you just as long. Come over here. My future father-in-law, the Jew, lives here.—Hey! Who’s in there?"
"Who are you? Tell me for more certainty, Albeit I’ll swear that I do know your tongue.","Who are you? Tell me so I can be sure, though I swear I recognize your voice."
"Lorenzo, and thy love.","I’m Lorenzo, your love."
"Lorenzo certain, and my love indeed— But you, Lorenzo, whether I am yours?","Lorenzo, that’s for sure, and I’m also sure you’re my love—who else do I love so much? And now who but you knows whether I’m yours?"
Heaven and thy thoughts are witness that thou art.,"As God is my witness, you know you’re mine."
"Here, catch this casket. It is worth the pains. I am glad ’tis night, you do not look on me, But love is blind, and lovers cannot see The pretty follies that themselves commit, For if they could Cupid himself would blush To see me thus transformèd to a boy.","Here, catch this box. It’ll be worth your while. I’m glad it’s nighttime and you can’t see me. I’m ashamed of my disguise. But love is blind, and lovers can’t see the silly things they do around each other. If they could, Cupid himself would be embarassed to see me dressed up as a boy."
"Descend, for you must be my torchbearer.",Come down here. You have to be my torchbearer for the masquerade.
"What, must I hold a candle to my shames? They in themselves, good sooth, are too too light. Why, ’tis an office of discovery, love. And I should be obscured.","What, I have to hold a candle up so people can see what I’m doing? The truth is, I’m behaving like a loose woman. The torchbearer is supposed to bring light and love, but I should be hidden away in the dark."
"So are you, sweet, But come at once, For the close night doth play the runaway, And we are stayed for at Bassanio’s feast.","You’re hidden away, sweetheart, dressed up like a boy. Come on quickly. Time flies at night, and we’re late for Bassanio’s feast."
I will make fast the doors and gild myself,"I’ll lock up the doors, grab some more ducats, and be with you right away."
"Now, by my hood, a gentle and no Jew.","My God, she can’t be a Jew, she’s too nice!"
"Beshrew me but I love her heartily. For she is wise, if I can judge of her. And fair she is, if that mine eyes be true. And therefore, like herself—wise, fair and true— Shall she be placèd in my constant soul.","God, I’m crazy about her. She’s wise, if I’m judging her right. She’s beautiful, if my eyes can see. And she’s loyal, as she has proven. And as long as she’s herself—wise, beautiful, and faithful—she’ll always have a place in my heart."
"What, art thou come?—On, gentlemen, away! Our masquing mates by this time for us stay.","Ah, you’re here?—Come on, gentlemen, let’s go! Our masquerade mates are waiting for us."
Who’s there?,Who’s there?
Signor Antonio?,Signor Antonio?
"Fie, fie, Gratiano! Where are all the rest? 'Tis nine o'clock. Our friends all stay for you. No masque tonight. The wind is come about. Bassanio presently will go aboard.","Gratiano, where is everybody? It’s nine o'clock! Our friends are all waiting for you. There’s no masquerade tonight. The wind is blowing right, so Bassanio’s going onboard immediately. I’ve sent twenty people to look for you."
I am glad on ’t. I desire no more delight Than to be under sail and gone tonight.,I’m glad. I want to head out tonight.
(to servant) Go draw aside the curtains and discover The several caskets to this noble prince.—,(to servant) Go open the curtains and show the different boxes to the prince.
"A curtain is drawn showing a gold, silver, and lead casket","A curtain is drawn revealing showing three caskets: one gold, one silver, and one lead."
(to MOROCCO) Now make your choice.,(to MOROCCO) Now make your choice.
"“Who chooseth me shall gain what many men desire.” The second, silver, which this promise carries: “Who chooseth me shall get as much as he deserves.” This third, dull lead, with warning all as blunt: How shall I know if I do choose the right?","The first one, the gold one, has an inscription that says, “He who chooses me will get what many men want.” The second one, the silver one, says, “He who chooses me will get what he deserves.” And this third one is made of dull lead. It has a blunt warning that says, “He who chooses me must give and risk all he has.” How will I know if I chose the right one?"
"The one of them contains my picture, Prince. If you choose that, then I am yours withal.","One of them contains my picture. If you choose that one, I’m yours, along with the picture."
Some god direct my judgment! Let me see. What says this leaden casket? “Who chooseth me must give and hazard all he hath.” Must give—for what? For lead? Hazard for lead? This casket threatens. Men that hazard all A golden mind stoops not to shows of dross. I’ll then nor give nor hazard aught for lead. What says the silver with her virgin hue?,I wish some god could help me choose! Let me see. I’ll look over the inscriptions again. What does the lead box say? “He who chooses me must give and risk all he has.” Must give everything—for what? For lead? Risk everything for lead? This box is too threatening. Men who risk everything hope to make profits. A golden mind doesn’t bend down to choose something worthless. So I won’t give or risk anything for lead. What does the silver one say?
"“Who chooseth me shall get as much as he deserves.” And weigh thy value with an even hand. If thou beest rated by thy estimation, Thou dost deserve enough, and yet enough May not extend so far as to the lady, Were but a weak disabling of myself. As much as I deserve! Why, that’s the lady. I do in birth deserve her, and in fortunes, In graces, and in qualities of breeding. What if I strayed no further, but chose here? Let’s see once more this saying graved in gold, “Who chooseth me shall gain what many men desire.” Why, that’s the lady. All the world desires her. To kiss this shrine, this mortal breathing saint. The Hyrcanian deserts and the vasty wilds Of wide Arabia are as thoroughfares now For princes to come view fair Portia. Spits in the face of heaven, is no bar To stop the foreign spirits, but they come As o'er a brook to see fair Portia. One of these three contains her heavenly picture. To think so base a thought. It were too gross To rib her cerecloth in the obscure grave. Or shall I think in silver she’s immured, Being ten times undervalued to tried gold? Was set in worse than gold. They have in England A coin that bears the figure of an angel Stamped in gold, but that’s insculped upon. But here an angel in a golden bed","“He who chooses me will get as much as he deserves.” As much as he deserves—wait a minute there, Morocco, and consider your own value with a level head. If your reputation is trustworthy, you deserve a lot—though maybe not enough to include this lady. But fearing I don’t deserve her is a way of underestimating myself. As much as I deserve—I deserve Portia! By birth I deserve her. In terms of wealth, talents, and upbringing, and especially love, I deserve her. What if I went no further and chose this one? But let’s see once more what the gold one says: “He who chooses me will get what many men want.” That’s Portia! The whole world wants her. They come from the four corners of the earth to kiss this shrine and see this living, breathing saint. Princes travel across deserts and the vast wilderness of Arabia to come see the beautiful Portia. The wide ocean doesn’t prevent them from coming to see her—they travel across it as if it were a little stream. One of these three boxes contains her lovely picture. Could the lead one contain it? No, it’d be a sin to think such a low thought. Lead’s too crass to hold her. Is she enclosed in silver, which is ten times less valuable than gold? Oh, what a sinful thought! Nobody ever set a gem like her in a worse setting than gold. They have a coin in England stamped with the figure of an angel, but that’s just engraved on the surface."
"Here do I choose, and thrive I as I may!",Here an angel’s lying in a golden bed.—Give me the key. I will choose this one and try my chances.
"(giving MOROCCO a key) There, take it, Prince. And if my form lie there Then I am yours.","(she hands him a key) There, take it, prince. And if my picture’s in there, then I’m yours."
"A carrion death, within whose empty eye There is a written scroll. I’ll read the writing. (reads) “All that glisters is not gold— Many a man his life hath sold But my outside to behold. Gilded tombs do worms enfold. Had you been as wise as bold, Your answer had not been inscrolled. Fare you well. Your suit is cold— Cold, indeed, and labor lost.” Then, farewell, heat, and welcome, frost! To take a tedious leave. Thus losers part.","Damn it! What’s this? It’s a skull with a scroll in its empty eye socket. I’ll read it aloud. (he reads) “All that glitters is not gold— You’ve often heard that said. Many men have sold their souls Just to view my shiny surface. But gilded tombs contain worms. If you’d been as wise as you were bold, With an old man’s mature judgment, You wouldn’t have had to read this scroll. So goodbye—you lost your chance.” Lost my chance indeed! So goodbye hope, and hello despair. Portia, goodbye to you. My heart’s too sad for long goodbyes. Losers always leave quickly."
"A gentle riddance.—Draw the curtains, go.— Let all of his complexion choose me so.",Good riddance!—Close the curtains and leave.—I hope everyone who looks like him will make the same choice.
"Why, man, I saw Bassanio under sail. With him is Gratiano gone along. And in their ship I am sure Lorenzo is not.","I saw Bassanio sail away, and Gratiano went with him. I’m sure Lorenzo isn’t on their ship."
"The villain Jew with outcries raised the Duke,",That wicked Jew got the duke to listen to his complaints. The duke went with him to search Bassanio’s ship.
He came too late. The ship was under sail. But there the Duke was given to understand That in a gondola were seen together Lorenzo and his amorous Jessica. They were not with Bassanio in his ship.,"He got there too late. The ship was already sailing. But once he got there, the duke learned that Lorenzo and his lover Jessica were together in a gondola. In any case, Antonio assured the duke they weren’t with Bassanio on his ship."
"I never heard a passion so confused, So strange, outrageous, and so variable, As the dog Jew did utter in the streets. Fled with a Christian! O my Christian ducats! Justice, the law, my ducats, and my daughter! A sealèd bag, two sealèd bags of ducats, Of double ducats, stol'n from me by my daughter! Stol'n by my daughter! Justice, find the girl! She hath the stones upon her, and the ducats.”","I’ve never heard such confused emotions as what that Jew dog was shouting in the streets. “My daughter, oh my ducats, oh my daughter! Ran off with a Christian! Oh my Christian ducats! Justice, the law, my ducats, and my daughter, a sealed bag, two sealed bags of ducats, of double ducats, stolen from me by my daughter, and jewels—two stones, two rich and precious stones—stolen by my daughter! Justice, find the girl! She has the stones on her, and the ducats.”"
"Why, all the boys in Venice follow him, Crying, “His stones, his daughter, and his ducats!”","I know, all the boys in Venice are following him, yelling, “His stones, his daughter, and his ducats!”"
Or he shall pay for this.,"I hope Antonio repays his loan on time, or he’ll suffer for this."
"Marry, well remembered. I reasoned with a Frenchman yesterday, Who told me, in the narrow seas that part The French and English, there miscarried I thought upon Antonio when he told me, And wished in silence that it were not his.",That’s a good point. I spoke with a Frenchman yesterday who said that a Venetian ship loaded with treasure was wrecked in the English Channel. I thought about Antonio when he told me. I silently hoped it wasn’t his ship.
"You were best to tell Antonio what you hear— Yet do not suddenly, for it may grieve him.","You should tell Antonio what you hear—but don’t do it suddenly, because it might upset him."
"I saw Bassanio and Antonio part. Bassanio told him he would make some speed Of his return. He answered, “Do not so. Slubber not business for my sake, Bassanio And for the Jew’s bond which he hath of me, Let it not enter in your mind of love. Be merry, and employ your chiefest thoughts To courtship and such fair ostents of love And even there, his eye being big with tears, Turning his face, he put his hand behind him, And with affection wondrous sensible He wrung Bassanio’s hand. And so they parted.","There’s no nicer guy in the whole world. I saw Bassanio and Antonio say goodbye. Bassanio told him he’d try to hurry back. Antonio answered “Don’t rush. Don’t do a sloppy job for my sake, Bassanio. Stay until everything is finished. As for the Jew’s contract, don’t let it be a factor in your plans. Be happy and concentrate your thoughts on love and how to win your love.” Then his eyes started tearing up. He turned his face away. Then he shook Bassanio’s hand affectionately—and they separated."
"I pray thee, let us go and find him out And quicken his embracèd heaviness With some delight or other.",I think he only loves life because of Bassanio. Let’s go find him and cheer him up.
Do we so.,"Yes, let’s do that."
"Quick, quick, I pray thee. Draw the curtain straight. The Prince of Arragon hath ta'en his oath And comes to his election presently.","Hurry, hurry, close the curtain quick. The prince of Arragon has taken his oath, and he’s coming to make his choice now."
"Behold, there stand the caskets, noble Prince. Straight shall our nuptial rites be solemnized. But if you fail, without more speech, my lord, You must be gone from hence immediately.","Look, here are the boxes, prince. If you choose the one that contains my picture, we’ll be married right away. But if you fail, you have to leave immediately. No pleas will be allowed."
"I am enjoined by oath to observe three things: Which casket ’twas I chose; next, if I fail Of the right casket, never in my life To woo a maid in way of marriage; lastly, If I do fail in fortune of my choice,","I swore I’d do three things. First, I can never tell anyone what box I choose. Second, if I choose the wrong box, I’ll never propose marriage for the rest of my life. Third, if I pick the wrong box, I’ll leave immediately."
To these injunctions every one doth swear That comes to hazard for my worthless self.,Everyone who comes to gamble on winning me has to swear to these three rules.
"And so have I addressed me. Fortune now To my heart’s hope! Gold, silver, and base lead. You shall look fairer ere I give or hazard. What says the golden chest? Ha, let me see. “Who chooseth me shall gain what many men desire.”","Okay, I’m ready. I hope luck will give me what my heart hopes for! Gold, silver, and common lead. “He who chooses me must give and risk all he has.” You’d have to be more attractive for me to give or risk anything for you. What does the golden box say? Hmm, let me see:"
"“What many men desire”—that “many” may be meant Not learning more than the fond eye doth teach; Which pries not to th' interior, but like the martlet Builds in the weather on the outward wall, Even in the force and road of casualty. Because I will not jump with common spirits And rank me with the barbarous multitudes. Why then, to thee, thou silver treasure house. Tell me once more what title thou dost bear. And well said too—for who shall go about To cozen fortune and be honorable Without the stamp of merit? Let none presume To wear an undeservèd dignity. Were not derived corruptly, and that clear honor Were purchased by the merit of the wearer! How many then should cover that stand bare! How many be commanded that command! From the true seed of honor! And how much honor Picked from the chaff and ruin of the times To be new varnished! Well, but to my choice. “Who chooseth me shall get as much as he deserves.” And instantly unlock my fortunes here.","“He who chooses me will get what many men want.” What many men want—that “many” could mean that most people are fools and choose by whatever is flashy. They don’t go beyond what their eyes see. They don’t bother to find out what’s on the inside. Just like those birds called martins who build their nests on the outside of walls, people pay too much attention to what’s on the outside. So I won’t choose what many men desire, because I won’t jump on the bandwagon and include myself with the whole crude population. So I guess it’s you, you silver treasure house. Tell me once more what you say. “He who chooses me will get what he deserves.” That’s nicely put—because who’s going to cheat luck and get more than he deserves? No one should have an honor he doesn’t deserve. Oh, wouldn’t it be great if property, rank, official positions, and other honors were earned only by merit, not by corruption? There wouldn’t be too many important men then. How many people who are humble now would be great then? How many people who give orders now would have to take orders? How many noblemen would be weeded out and would become peasants? And how many common people would suddenly shine with nobility? Well, let me get back to my choice. “He who chooses me will get what he deserves.” I’ll assume I deserve the very best.—Give me a key for this one. I’ll unlock my fate here in a second."
Too long a pause for that which you find there.,"You thought about it too long, considering what you found there."
What’s here? The portrait of a blinking idiot Presenting me a schedule! I will read it.— How much unlike my hopes and my deservings! “Who chooseth me shall have as much as he deserves”! Did I deserve no more than a fool’s head? Is that my prize? Are my deserts no better?,"What’s this? A picture of an idiot holding a scroll up for me to read! I’ll read it.—It looks so unlike Portia! This outcome isn’t what I hoped for, or what I deserve. “The one who chooses me will get what he deserves”! Didn’t I deserve anything more than a fool’s head? Is this my prize? Don’t I deserve more than this?"
And of opposèd natures.,"Judging what you deserve is one thing. Offending you is something very different, so I’ll keep my mouth shut."
"What is here? (reads) “The fire seven times tried this, Seven times tried that judgment is, Some there be that shadows kiss. Such have but a shadow’s bliss. There be fools alive, iwis, Silvered o'er—and so was this. I will ever be your head. So be gone. You are sped. Still more fool I shall appear” By the time I linger here. But I go away with two.— Sweet, adieu. I’ll keep my oath Patiently to bear my wroth.”","What does this say? (he reads) “This box was tested in the fire seven times. The person who never makes a wrong choice Has wisdom that will stand the test. Some people kiss shadows. They only feel the shadow of joy. There are fools out there With silver hair and silver coins. This choice was as foolish as they are. Take whatever wife you want to bed with you, You’ll have a fool’s head forever. So go away. You’re done here.” The longer I stay, the more foolish I look. I came here with a fool’s head on my shoulders and now I’m leaving with two.—Goodbye, sweet lady. I’ll keep my oath and patiently suffer through my anger."
Thus hath the candle singed the moth. They have the wisdom by their wit to lose.,"These men are like moths, drawn to these boxes as if they were flames. This is how the candle burned the moth. Oh, these fools! When they choose, they only know how to lose."
The ancient saying is no heresy. Hanging and wiving goes by destiny.,You know what they say. Destiny chooses when you’ll die and who you’ll marry.
"Come, draw the curtain, Nerissa.","Come on, close the curtain, Nerissa."
Where is my lady?,Where’s lady Portia?
Here. What would my lord?,"Here. How can I help you, sir?"
"Madam, there is alighted at your gate A young Venetian, one that comes before To signify th' approaching of his lord, From whom he bringeth sensible regreets, Gifts of rich value. Yet I have not seen So likely an ambassador of love. A day in April never came so sweet To show how costly summer was at hand,","Madam, a young Venetian man has arrived to tell us his master is about to arrive. This lord has sent gifts. Besides his nice polite greetings, his gifts are expensive. I haven’t seen such a promising candidate for your love. This servant has arrived before his master the way a sweet spring day hints about a lush summer. But there’s never been an April day as promising as this."
"No more, I pray thee. I am half afeard Thou wilt say anon he is some kin to thee, Thou spend’st such high-day wit in praising him.— Come, come, Nerissa, for I long to see","Please don’t tell me any more. I’m almost afraid you’re going to tell me he’s a relative of yours, because you’re going so crazy praising him. Come on, Nerissa, I want to go see this man who’s come so courteously."
"Bassanio, Lord Love, if thy will it be!",I hope it’s Bassanio coming to win Portia!
"Now, what news on the Rialto?","So, what’s the news on the Rialto?"
"Why, yet it lives there unchecked that Antonio hath a ship of rich lading wracked on the narrow seas. The Goodwins I think they call the place—a very dangerous flat, and fatal, where the carcasses of many a tall ship lie buried, as they say, if my gossip report be an honest woman of her word.","Well, there’s a rumor that Antonio had a ship carrying expensive cargo that shipwrecked in the English Channel on the Goodwin Sands, a very dangerous sandbar. Many ships have sunk there, according to rumors."
"I would she were as lying a gossip in that as ever knapped ginger or made her neighbors believe she wept for the death of a third husband. But it is true, without any slips of prolixity or crossing the plain highway of talk, that the good Antonio, the honest Antonio—oh, that I had a title good enough to keep his name company!—","I hope this new rumor is a lie, like the gossiping widow’s claim that she was sorry her third husband died! But it’s true—I don’t want to get all mushy and go on and on, but the good Antonio, the honest Antonio—oh, if I only had a title good enough to match his!—"
"Come, the full stop.","Come on, get to the point."
"Ha, what sayest thou? Why, the end is he hath lost a ship.","What are you saying? Well, the point is, he’s lost a ship."
I would it might prove the end of his losses.,I hope that’s all he loses.
"Let me say “Amen” betimes, lest the devil cross my prayer, for here he comes in the likeness of a Jew.","Let me say “amen” quickly, before the devil comes in and stops my prayer—because here comes the devil, disguised as a Jew."
"How now, Shylock? What news among the merchants?","How’s it going, Shylock? What’s the news among the merchants?"
"You knew—none so well, none so well as you—of my daughter’s flight.","You knew—no one knew, no one knew as well as you did—about my daughter’s plans to run away."
"That’s certain. I, for my part, knew the tailor that made the wings she flew withal.",That’s true. I even knew the tailor who made the disguise she wore when she ran off.
"And Shylock, for his own part, knew the bird was fledged, and then it is the complexion of them all to leave the dam.",And Shylock knew his daughter was ready to run away. It’s natural for children to leave their parents.
She is damned for it.,She’ll be damned for it.
That’s certain—if the devil may be her judge.,That’s true—if the devil’s judging her.
My own flesh and blood to rebel!,My own flesh and blood turned against me! A rebel!
"Out upon it, old carrion! Rebels it at these years?",No! Your flesh still rebels Solanio pretends to think Shylock means he can’t control his own sexual urges. flesh still rebels at your age?
I say my daughter is my flesh and blood.,I mean my daughter is my flesh and blood.
"There is more difference between thy flesh and hers than between jet and ivory, more between your bloods than there is between red wine and rhenish. But tell us, do you hear whether Antonio have had any loss at sea or no?","You two are totally different. Your flesh is more different from hers than coal is from ivory. There’s more difference between your bloods than between red wine and white. But tell us, did you hear anything about Antonio’s loss at sea?"
"There I have another bad match!—a bankrupt, a prodigal who dare scarce show his head on the Rialto, a beggar that was used to come so smug upon the mart. Let him look to his bond. He was wont to call me usurer; let him look to his bond. He was wont to lend money for a Christian courtesy; let him look to his bond.","That’s another bad deal I’ve made!—a bankrupt, a spendthrift, who now has to hide his head on the Rialto, a beggar who used to look so smug in front of the other merchants. Let him think about his own debt. He liked to call me a loan shark; let him think about his debt to me. He used to lend money as a favor between Christians; but now, let him think about his own debt."
"Why, I am sure, if he forfeit thou wilt not take his flesh. What’s that good for?",But you won’t take his flesh if he can’t pay. What’s that good for?
"To bait fish withal. If it will feed nothing else, it will feed my revenge. He hath disgraced me and hindered me half a million, laughed at my losses, mocked at my gains, scorned my nation, thwarted my bargains, cooled my friends, heated mine enemies—and what’s his reason? I am a Jew. Hath not a Jew eyes? Hath not a Jew hands, organs, dimensions, senses, affections, passions? Fed with the same food, hurt with the same weapons, subject to the same diseases, healed by the same means, warmed and cooled by the same winter and summer as a Christian is? If you prick us, do we not bleed? If you tickle us, do we not laugh? If you poison us, do we not die? And if you wrong us, shall we not revenge? If we are like you in the rest, we will resemble you in that. If a Jew wrong a Christian, what is his humility? Revenge. If a Christian wrong a Jew, what should his sufferance be by Christian example? Why, revenge. The villainy you teach me I will execute—and it shall go hard but I will better the instruction.","I’ll use it for fish bait. You can’t eat human flesh, but if it feeds nothing else, it’ll feed my revenge. He’s insulted me and cost me half a million ducats. He’s laughed at my losses, made fun of my earnings, humiliated my race, thwarted my deals, turned my friends against me, riled up my enemies—and why? Because I’m a Jew. Doesn’t a Jew have eyes? Doesn’t a Jew have hands, bodily organs, a human shape, five senses, feelings, and passions? Doesn’t a Jew eat the same food, get hurt with the same weapons, get sick with the same diseases, get healed by the same medicine, and warm up in summer and cool off in winter just like a Christian? If you prick us with a pin, don’t we bleed? If you tickle us, don’t we laugh? If you poison us, don’t we die? And if you treat us badly, won’t we try to get revenge? If we’re like you in everything else, we’ll resemble you in that respect. If a Jew offends a Christian, what’s the Christian’s kind and gentle reaction? Revenge. If a Christian offends a Jew, what punishment will he come up with if he follows the Christian example? Of course, the same thing—revenge! I’ll treat you as badly as you Christians taught me to—and you’ll be lucky if I don’t outdo my teachers."
"(to SOLANIO and SALARINO) Gentlemen, my master Antonio is at his house and desires to speak with you both.",(to SOLANIO and SALARINO) My master Antonio is at his house and would like to speak to you both.
We have been up and down to seek him.,We’ve been looking for him everywhere.
Here comes another of the tribe. A third cannot be matched unless the devil himself turn Jew.,Here comes another Jew. You couldn’t find a third like these two unless the devil himself turned into a Jew.
"How now, Tubal? What news from Genoa? Hast thou found my daughter?","Hello, Tubal. Any news from Genoa? Did you find my daughter?"
"I often came where I did hear of her, but cannot find her.","I went to many places where I heard news about her, but I couldn’t find her."
"Why, there, there, there, there! A diamond gone cost me two thousand ducats in Frankfurt—the curse never fell upon our nation till now! I never felt it till now—Two thousand ducats in that, and other precious, precious jewels. I would my daughter were dead at my foot and the jewels in her ear! Would she were hearsed at my foot and the ducats in her coffin! No news of them? Why, so. And I know not what’s spent in the search. Why thou, loss upon loss! The thief gone with so much, and so much to find the thief—and no satisfaction, no revenge. Nor no ill luck stirring but what lights o' my shoulders, no sighs but o' my breathing, no tears but o' my shedding.","Oh, oh, oh! One of the stolen diamonds cost me two thousand ducats in Frankfurt! I never felt the curse of the Jews until now. I never felt it until now—two thousand ducats in that diamond, and other precious, precious jewels! I wish my daughter were dead at my feet wearing those jewels! I wish she were in her coffin here, with the ducats in her coffin! You couldn’t find out anything about them? Why? I don’t even know how much I’m spending to find them. Loss upon loss! The thief left with so much, and I’m spending so much to hunt down the thief—and still I’m not satisfied! I haven’t gotten my revenge. The only luck I have is bad luck. Nobody suffers but me. Nobody’s crying except me."
"Yes, other men have ill luck too. Antonio, as I heard in Genoa—","Well, other men have bad luck too. Antonio, as I heard in Genoa—"
"What, what, what? Ill luck, ill luck?","What, what, what? Bad luck, bad luck?"
Hath an argosy cast away coming from Tripolis.,He’s had a ship wrecked coming from Tripolis.
"I thank God, I thank God! Is ’t true, is ’t true?","Thank God, thank God! Is it true, is it true?"
I spoke with some of the sailors that escaped the wrack.,I spoke with some of the sailors who survived the wreck.
"I thank thee, good Tubal. Good news, good news! Ha, ha, heard in Genoa.","Thank you, Tubal. Good news, good news! Ha, ha, heard in Genoa."
"Your daughter spent in Genoa, as I heard, in one night fourscore ducats.",I also heard that your daughter spent eighty ducats in Genoa one night.
Thou stickest a dagger in me. I shall never see my gold again. Fourscore ducats at a sitting! Fourscore ducats!,"Oh, you’re sticking a dagger in me! I’ll never see my gold again. Eighty ducats in one shot! Eighty ducats!"
There came divers of Antonio’s creditors in my company to Venice that swear he cannot choose but break.,I came to Venice with a number of Antonio’s creditors who say he won’t be able to avoid going bankrupt.
I am very glad of it. I’ll plague him. I’ll torture him. I am glad of it.,I’m very glad about that. I’ll hound him. I’ll torture him. I’m very glad.
One of them showed me a ring that he had of your daughter for a monkey.,One creditor showed me a ring he got from your daughter in exchange for a monkey.
"Out upon her! Thou torturest me, Tubal. It was my turquoise. I had it of Leah when I was a bachelor. I would not have given it for a wilderness of monkeys.","Damn her! You’re torturing me, Tubal. That was my turquoise ring! Leah gave it to me before we were married. I wouldn’t have given it away for a whole jungle of monkeys."
But Antonio is certainly undone.,But Antonio’s certainly ruined.
"Nay, that’s true, that’s very true. Go, Tubal, fee me an officer. Bespeak him a fortnight before.—I will have the heart of him if he forfeit, for were he out of Venice I can make what merchandise I will.—Go, go, Tubal, and meet me at our synagogue. Go, good Tubal. At our synagogue, Tubal.","That’s true, that’s very true. Tubal, go find me a police officer to arrest Antonio. Get him ready two weeks ahead of time.—I’ll take Antonio’s heart if he can’t pay. With him out of Venice, I can make whatever bargains I want when I lend money.—Go, Tubal. Meet me at the synagogue."
"(to BASSANIO) I pray you, tarry. Pause a day or two Before you hazard, for in choosing wrong I lose your company. Therefore forbear awhile. There’s something tells me—but it is not love— Hate counsels not in such a quality. But lest you should not understand me well— And yet a maiden hath no tongue but thought— I would detain you here some month or two How to choose right, but I am then forsworn. So will I never be. So may you miss me. But if you do, you’ll make me wish a sin, That I had been forsworn. Beshrew your eyes, One half of me is yours, the other half yours— Mine own, I would say. But if mine, then yours, And so all yours. Oh, these naughty times Put bars between the owners and their rights! Let Fortune go to hell for it, not I. I speak too long, but ’tis to peize the time, To eke it and to draw it out in length, To stay you from election.","(to BASSANIO) Please wait a day or two before making your choice. If you choose wrong, I’ll lose your company. So wait a while. Something tells me—not love, but something—that I don’t want to lose you, and you know that if I hated you I wouldn’t think that. But let me put it more clearly in case you don’t understand—though I know girls aren’t supposed to express their thoughts—I’m just saying I’d like you to stay here for a month or two before you undergo the test for me. I could tell you how to choose correctly, but then I’d be disregarding the oath I took. So I’ll never tell. But you might lose me by making the wrong choice. If you do choose wrong, you’ll make me wish for something very bad. I’d wish I had ignored my oath and told you everything. God, your eyes have bewitched me. They’ve divided me in two. One half of me is yours, and the other half—my own half, I’d call it—belongs to you too. If it’s mine, then it’s yours, and so I’m all yours. But in this awful day and age people don’t even have the right to their own property! So though I’m yours, I’m not yours. If there’s no chance for me to be yours, then it’s just bad luck. I know I’m talking too much, but I do that just to make the time last longer, and to postpone your test."
"Let me choose,",Let me choose now. I feel tortured by all this talking.
"Upon the rack, Bassanio? Then confess What treason there is mingled with your love.","Tortured, Bassanio Portia and Bassanio are role-playing here, pretending to be torturer and victim. Bassanio ? Then confess to your crime. Tell us about the treason you’ve mixed in with your love."
"None but that ugly treason of mistrust Which makes me fear th' enjoying of my love. 'Tween snow and fire, as treason and my love.",The only treason I’m guilty of is worrying that I’m never going to get to enjoy you. Treason has nothing at all to do with my love. They’re as opposite as hot and cold.
"Ay, but I fear you speak upon the rack Where men enforcèd do speak anything.","Hmmm, I’m not sure I believe what you’re saying. Men under torture will confess anything."
"Promise me life, and I’ll confess the truth.","Promise me you’ll let me live, and I’ll confess the truth."
"Well then, confess and live.","All right then, confess and live."
"“Confess and love” Had been the very sum of my confession. O happy torment, when my torturer Doth teach me answers for deliverance! But let me to my fortune and the caskets.","“Confess and love” is more like it. Oh, torture’s fun when my torturer tells me what I have to say to go free! But let me try my luck on the boxes."
"If you do love me you will find me out.— Nerissa and the rest, stand all aloof. Let music sound while he doth make his choice. Then if he lose he makes a swanlike end, May stand more proper, my eye shall be the stream And watery deathbed for him. He may win, And what is music then? Then music is Even as the flourish when true subjects bow As are those dulcet sounds in break of day That creep into the dreaming bridegroom’s ear And summon him to marriage.","Go ahead, then. I’m locked in one of them. If you really love me, you’ll find me.—Nerissa and the rest of you, get away from him. Play some music while he chooses. Then if he loses, it’ll be his swan song, music before the end. And since swans need water to swim in, I’ll cry him a river when he loses. But on the other hand, he may win. What music should we play then? If he wins, the music should be like the majestic trumpets that blare when subjects bow to a newly crowned monarch. It’s the sweet sounds at daybreak that the dreaming bridegroom hears on his wedding morning, calling him to the church."
"Now he goes With no less presence but with much more love The virgin tribute paid by howling Troy To the sea monster. I stand for sacrifice. The rest aloof are the Dardanian wives, With blearèd visages come forth to view Live thou, I live. With much, much more dismay I view the fight than thou that makest the fray.","Bassanio’s walking to the boxes now. He looks as dignified as Hercules did when he saved the princess Hesione from the sea monster. But he loves me more than Hercules loved the princess. I’ll play Hesione, and everyone else will be the bystanders watching with tear-streaked faces. We’ve all come out to see what will happen.—Go, Hercules! If you survive, I’ll live. I’m more anxious watching you fight than you are in the fight itself."
"(sings) Tell me where is fancy bred. How begot, how nourishèd?","(singing) Tell me where do our desires start, In the heart or in the head? How are they created, how sustained?"
"Reply, reply.","Answer me, answer me."
"(sings) It is engendered in the eyes, In the cradle where it lies. Let us all ring fancy’s knell I’ll begin it.—Ding, dong, bell.","(singing) Desires start in the eyes, Sustained by gazing, and desires die Very young. Let’s all mourn our dead desires. I’ll begin—Ding, dong, bell."
"Ding, dong, bell.","Ding, dong, bell."
"The world is still deceived with ornament. In law, what plea so tainted and corrupt But, being seasoned with a gracious voice, Obscures the show of evil? In religion, Will bless it and approve it with a text, Hiding the grossness with fair ornament? There is no vice so simple but assumes Some mark of virtue on his outward parts. As stairs of sand wear yet upon their chins The beards of Hercules and frowning Mars, Who, inward searched, have livers white as milk, And these assume but valor’s excrement And you shall see ’tis purchased by the weight, Which therein works a miracle in nature, Making them lightest that wear most of it. So are those crispèd snaky golden locks Upon supposèd fairness, often known To be the dowry of a second head, The skull that bred them in the sepulcher. Thus ornament is but the guilèd shore Veiling an Indian beauty—in a word, The seeming truth which cunning times put on To entrap the wisest. Therefore then, thou gaudy gold, Hard food for Midas, I will none of thee. 'Tween man and man. But thou, thou meagre lead, Which rather threaten’st than dost promise aught, Thy paleness moves me more than eloquence, And here choose I. Joy be the consequence!","You can’t always judge a book by its cover. People are often tricked by false appearances. In court, someone can deliver a false plea but hide its wickedness with a pretty voice. In religion, don’t serious men defend sins with Scripture, covering up evil with a show of good. Every sin in the world manages to make itself look good somehow. How many people are cowards at heart but wear beards like Hercules or Mars, the god of war? Take another example: beauty. It can be bought by the ounce in makeup, which works miracles. Women who wear it the most are respected the least. It’s the same thing with hair. Curly golden hair moves so nicely in the wind and makes a woman beautiful. But you can buy that kind of hair as a wig, and wigs are made from dead people’s hair. Decoration’s nothing but a danger, meant to trick and trap the viewer. A lovely, cunning shore can distract a man from the perils of a stormy sea, just as a pretty scarf can hide a dangerous dark-skinned beauty. Nowadays, everyone’s fooled by appearances. So I’ll have nothing to do with that gaudy gold box—it’s like the gold that Midas couldn’t eat. And I’ll have nothing to do with the pale silver either, the metal that common coins are made of. But this humble lead one, though it looks too threatening to promise me anything good, moves me more than I can say. So this is the one I choose. I hope I’m happy with my choice!"
"As doubtful thoughts, and rash-embraced despair, And shuddering fear, and green-eyed jealousy! O love, be moderate. Allay thy ecstasy. In measure rein thy joy. Scant this excess. For fear I surfeit.","(to herself) All my other emotions are vanishing into thin air, as all my doubts and desperation and fears and jealousy are all flying away! Oh, I need to calm down, make my love and my joy less intense. I’m feeling this too strongly. Please make my love less, or I’m going to overindulge, making myself sick."
"(opening the lead casket) What find I here? Fair Portia’s counterfeit! What demigod Hath come so near creation? Move these eyes? Seem they in motion? Here are severed lips, Parted with sugar breath. So sweet a bar Should sunder such sweet friends. Here in her hairs, The painter plays the spider and hath woven Faster than gnats in cobwebs. But her eyes— How could he see to do them? Having made one, Methinks it should have power to steal both his And leave itself unfurnished. Yet look how far In underprizing it, so far this shadow Doth limp behind the substance. Here’s the scroll, The continent and summary of my fortune. (reads) Chance as fair and choose as true. Since this fortune falls to you, Be content and seek no new. If you be well pleased with this Turn you where your lady is And claim her with a loving kiss.”","(opening the lead box) What do we have here? A picture of beautiful Portia! What artist captured her likeness so well? Are these eyes moving? Or do they just seem to move as my eyes move? Her sweet breath forces her lips open, a lovely divider of lovely lips. And look at her hair, looking like a golden mesh to trap the hearts of men, like little flies in a cobweb. The painter was like a spider in creating it so delicately. But her eyes—how could he keep looking at them long enough to paint them? I would’ve expected that when he finished one of them, it would have enraptured him and kept him from painting the other. But I’m giving only faint praise of the picture, just as the picture, as good as it is, is only a faint imitation of the real woman herself. Here’s the scroll that sums up my fate: (he reads) “You who don’t judge by looks alone, Have better luck, and make the right choice. Since this prize is yours, Be happy with it, and don’t look for a new one. If you’re happy with what you’ve won And accept this prize as your blissful destiny, Then turn to where your lady is, And claim her with a loving kiss.”"
"A gentle scroll. Fair lady, by your leave, I come by note to give and to receive. That thinks he hath done well in people’s eyes, Hearing applause and universal shout, Giddy in spirit, still gazing in a doubt Whether these pearls of praise be his or no— As doubtful whether what I see be true Until confirmed, signed, ratified by you.","A nice message. My lady, with your permission, this note authorizes me to give myself to you with a kiss. But I’m in a daze, like someone who’s just won a contest and thinks that all the applause and cheering is for him, but isn’t sure yet. And so, beautiful lady, I’m standing here just like that, wondering whether all this can be true until you tell me it is."
"You see me, Lord Bassanio, where I stand Such as I am. Though for myself alone To wish myself much better, yet for you I would be trebled twenty times myself— A thousand times more fair, ten thousand times more rich— That only to stand high in your account Exceed account. But the full sum of me Is sum of something which, to term in gross, Is an unlessoned girl, unschooled, unpracticèd; Happy in this—she is not yet so old She is not bred so dull but she can learn. Happiest of all is that her gentle spirit Commits itself to yours to be directed As from her lord, her governor, her king. Is now converted. But now I was the lord Of this fair mansion, master of my servants, Queen o'er myself. And even now, but now, This house, these servants, and this same myself Which when you part from, lose, or give away, Let it presage the ruin of your love","You see me standing here, Lord Bassanio. What you see is what you get. Though I wouldn’t wish to be better for my own sake, for your sake I wish I were twenty times more than myself—a thousand times more beautiful and ten thousand times richer—just so you might value me more, so my good qualities, beauty, possessions, and friends would be more than you could calculate. What you’re getting is an innocent and inexperienced girl. I’m happy that at least I’m not too old to learn new things. I’m even happier that I’m not stupid, and I can learn. I’m happiest of all that I’m yours now, my lord, my king, and you can guide me as you wish. Everything I am and everything I have now belongs to you. Just a minute ago I was the owner of this beautiful mansion, master of these servants, and queen over myself. But as of right this second all these things are yours. With this ring I give them all to you."
And be my vantage to exclaim on you. (gives BASSANIO a ring),"If you ever give away this ring or lose it, it means our love’s doomed, and I’ll have a right to be angry with you. (she gives BASSANIO the ring)"
"Only my blood speaks to you in my veins. And there is such confusion in my powers As after some oration fairly spoke By a belovèd prince there doth appear Where every something, being blent together, Turns to a wild of nothing, save of joy, Expressed and not expressed. But when this ring Parts from this finger, then parts life from hence.","Madam, you’ve left me speechless, but my feelings are responding to your words. I’m as confused as a crowd of people going wild after hearing their prince give a speech. But the day I take this ring off will be the day I die. If you see me without it, you can be confident I’m dead."
"My lord and lady, it is now our time, That have stood by and seen our wishes prosper, To cry, “Good joy, good joy, my lord and lady!”","My lord and lady, it’s now our turn, who have been watching as our dreams came true. Now we can shout, “Congratulations, congratulations, my lord and lady!”"
"My Lord Bassanio and my gentle lady, For I am sure you can wish none from me. And when your honors mean to solemnize The bargain of your faith, I do beseech you Even at that time I may be married too.","My Lord Bassanio, and my dear lady, I wish you all the joy I can wish for. And when you get married, I hope I can be married at the same time."
"With all my heart, so thou canst get a wife.","Absolutely, if you can find a wife by then."
"I thank your lordship, you have got me one. My eyes, my lord, can look as swift as yours. You saw the mistress, I beheld the maid. You loved, I loved. For intermission Your fortune stood upon the casket there, And so did mine too, as the matter falls. For wooing here until I sweat again, And swearing till my very roof was dry I got a promise of this fair one here To have her love, provided that your fortune Achieved her mistress.","I think I’ve found one already, thanks to you, my lord. I can fall in love just as quickly as you can, and I loved Nerissa as soon as I laid eyes on her. You fell in love with Portia, and I fell in love with Nerissa, because I’m not in the habit of delaying any more than you are, my lord. Your fate depended on those boxes, and it turns out that mine did too. I couldn’t help but chase her. I started making love vows to her till my mouth was dry. Then finally she said she loved me and would marry me if you two got married as well."
"Is this true, Nerissa?","Is that true, Nerissa?"
"Madam, it is, so you stand pleased withal.","Yes, madam, it is, if it’s all right with you."
"And do you, Gratiano, mean good faith?","And do you mean what you’re saying, Gratiano?"
"Yes, faith, my lord.","Yes, my lord."
Our feast shall be much honored in your marriage.,Then we’d be honored to have you join us in our wedding ceremony.
(to NERISSA) We’ll play with them the first boy for a thousand ducats.,(to NERISSA) Let’s bet them a thousand ducats that we will have a son first.
"What, and stake down?",You want to stake the money down now?
"No, we shall ne'er win at that sport and stake down. But who comes here? Lorenzo and his infidel? What, and my old Venetian friend Salerio?","Hey, if I lay down my “ stake Gratiano puns on “stake” as both money that is bet and penis. stake ,” I’ll never be able to have a son. But who’s this coming? Lorenzo and his pagan girlfriend? What, and my old Venetian friend Salerio?"
"Lorenzo and Salerio, welcome hither, Have power to bid you welcome. (to PORTIA) By your leave, I bid my very friends and countrymen, Sweet Portia, welcome.","Welcome, Lorenzo and Salerio. I hope my position in this new house is firm enough to allow me the right to welcome my friends. (to PORTIA) With your permission, Portia, I welcome my good friends and countrymen."
"So do I, my lord.","I do too, my lord. They’re entirely welcome."
"(to BASSANIO) I thank your honor. For my part, my lord, My purpose was not to have seen you here. But meeting with Salerio by the way, He did entreat me, past all saying nay,","(to BASSANIO) Thank you, sir. I didn’t intend to come see you. But I ran into Salerio on the way, and he begged me to come along with him until I couldn’t say no."
"I did, my lord. And I have reason for it. Signor Antonio Commends him to you. (gives BASSANIO letter)","That’s true, and with good reason. This letter is for you from Signor Antonio. (he gives BASSANIO a letter)"
"Ere I ope his letter, I pray you tell me how my good friend doth.","Before I open this letter, please tell me how my good friend is doing."
"Nor well, unless in mind. His letter there Will show you his estate.","He’s not sick, my lord, but he’s very upset, and his problems are serious. His letter will tell you how he’s doing."
"(indicating JESSICA) Nerissa, cheer yond stranger. Bid her welcome.— How doth that royal merchant, good Antonio? I know he will be glad of our success. We are the Jasons, we have won the fleece.","(pointing at JESSICA) Nerissa, welcome this stranger. —Salerio, welcome. Any news from Venice? How’s the great merchant Antonio doing? I know he’ll be happy to hear of our success. We’re like the ancient hero Jason, we went looking for the Golden Fleece and we won it!"
I would you had won the fleece that he hath lost.,I wish you’d won the fleece Salerio puns on “fleece” (the wool from a ram) and “fleets” (groups of ships). fleece he lost.
"That steals the color from Bassanio’s cheek. Some dear friend dead, else nothing in the world Could turn so much the constitution Of any constant man. What, worse and worse?— And I must freely have the half of anything That this same paper brings you.","Something bad in that letter is making Bassanio turn pale. Some good friend of his must have died, because nothing else in the world could change a man so much. What, does the news only get worse?—Please, Bassanio, I’m half of you, so let me bear half the burden this letter brings you."
"O sweet Portia, Here are a few of the unpleasant’st words That ever blotted paper. Gentle lady, I freely told you, all the wealth I had Ran in my veins. I was a gentleman, And then I told you true. And yet, dear lady, Rating myself at nothing, you shall see My state was nothing, I should then have told you That I was worse than nothing, for indeed I have engaged myself to a dear friend, Engaged my friend to his mere enemy Here is a letter, lady, The paper as the body of my friend, And every word in it a gaping wound, Issuing life blood.—But is it true, Salerio? Have all his ventures failed? What, not one hit? From Lisbon, Barbary, and India? And not one vessel ’scape the dreadful touch Of merchant-marring rocks?","Oh Portia, these are some of the worst words that ever stained a piece of paper. My darling, when I gave my love to you, I told you that all the wealth I had ran within my veins—that I have noble blood, but no money. When I said that, I told you the truth. But my dear, when I said I was worth nothing, I was actually bragging—I should’ve said that I was worse than nothing. I’ve borrowed money from a dear friend who in turn borrowed money from his mortal enemy for my sake. Here’s a letter, my dear. The paper’s like my friend’s body, and every word in it is a bleeding wound on that body.—But is it true, Salerio? Have all his business ventures failed? Not even one success? He had ships to Tripolis, Mexico, England, Lisbon, North Africa, and India, and not one of these ships avoided the rocks?"
"Not one, my lord. Besides, it should appear that if he had He would not take it. Never did I know A creature that did bear the shape of man So keen and greedy to confound a man. He plies the duke at morning and at night, If they deny him justice. Twenty merchants, The duke himself, and the magnificoes Of greatest port have all persuaded with him. But none can drive him from the envious plea","Not one, my lord. Anyway, even if he had the money now, the Jew probably wouldn’t take it. I’ve never seen a creature with a human shape who was so eager to destroy a man. He’s at the duke’s morning and night, accusing the state of harming free trade if they deny him justice. Twenty merchants, the duke himself, and the highest-ranking Venetian nobles have all tried to persuade him to forget his contract, but nobody can do it. He’s determined to get the penalty specified in his contract with Antonio."
"When I was with him I have heard him swear To Tubal and to Chus, his countrymen, That he would rather have Antonio’s flesh Than twenty times the value of the sum If law, authority, and power deny not, It will go hard with poor Antonio.","When I was still living with him I heard him swear to Tubal and Cush, his countrymen, that he’d rather have Antonio’s flesh than twenty times the sum Antonio owed. And I know that unless the law intervenes, it’ll be bad news for poor Antonio."
Is it your dear friend that is thus in trouble?,Is this your good friend who’s in so much trouble?
"The dearest friend to me, the kindest man, In doing courtesies, and one in whom The ancient Roman honor more appears Than any that draws breath in Italy.","Yes, he’s my best friend, the kindest man and most courteous to others. He’s more honorable than anyone else in Italy."
What sum owes he the Jew?,How much does he owe the Jew?
"For me, three thousand ducats.",Three thousand ducats.
"What, no more? Pay him six thousand and deface the bond! Double six thousand, and then treble that, Before a friend of this description Shall lose a hair through Bassanio’s fault. And then away to Venice to your friend. For never shall you lie by Portia’s side With an unquiet soul. You shall have gold To pay the petty debt twenty times over. My maid Nerissa and myself meantime Will live as maids and widows. Come, away! For you shall hence upon your wedding day. Bid your friends welcome, show a merry cheer. But let me hear the letter of your friend.","What, that’s all? Pay him six thousand and cancel the debt. I’d pay twelve thousand before I’d let a friend like that suffer in the slightest because of you. First come with me to church to get married. Then you can leave for Venice to see your friend. You have to go, because you’ll never sleep next to me peacefully without settling this. I’ll give you enough gold to pay back your debt twenty times over. When it’s paid, bring your friend back. Until you get back, Nerissa and I will live like virgins and widows. Come on, let’s go, because you’re going to leave me the same day we get married. Put on a happy face, and welcome your friends. Since it’s costing me a lot to marry you, I’ll think of you as even more precious. But let me hear the letter from your friend."
"(reads) “Sweet Bassanio, my ships have all miscarried. My creditors grow cruel. My estate is very low. My bond to the Jew is forfeit. And since in paying it, it is impossible I should live, all debts are cleared between you and I if I might but see you at my death. Notwithstanding, use your pleasure. If your love do not persuade you to come, let not my letter.”","(he reads) “Dear Bassanio, my ships have all been wrecked. My creditors are getting mean. My money’s almost run out. I couldn’t pay my debt to the Jew on the due date. Since I’ll certainly die when he takes his collateral out of my flesh, all debts are cleared between you and me if I can just see you again before I die. In any case, do what you want. If your affection for me doesn’t convince you to come, don’t let my letter do so.”"
"O love, dispatch all business and be gone!","Oh, my darling, make your arrangements and go!"
"Since I have your good leave to go away, I will make haste. But till I come again, No bed shall e'er be guilty of my stay,","Since you’re letting me leave, I’ll hurry. But I won’t sleep till I get back."
"Jailer, look to him. Tell not me of mercy. This is the fool that lent out money gratis. Jailer, look to him.","Jailer, watch out for this one. Don’t try to convince me to feel sorry for him. This is the fool who lent out money without charging interest. Jailer, keep an eye on him."
"Hear me yet, good Shylock.","Listen to me, good Shylock."
"I’ll have my bond. Speak not against my bond. Thou calledst me dog before thou hadst a cause. But since I am a dog, beware my fangs. The duke shall grant me justice.—I do wonder, Thou naughty jailer, that thou art so fond","I’m going to get my bond Shylock uses the word “bond” here to mean the goods Antonio promised to give Shylock if he defaulted on the loan—in other words, the pound of Antonio’s flesh. bond . Don’t try to say anything against my taking my bond. I’ve sworn an oath that I will have my bond. You called me a dog before you had any reason to. But since I’m a dog, beware my fangs. The duke will give me justice.—I do wonder, jailer, how you can be so foolish as to let this prisoner out of his cell."
"I pray thee, hear me speak.","Please, listen to me."
"I’ll have my bond. I will not hear thee speak. I’ll have my bond, and therefore speak no more. I’ll not be made a soft and dull-eyed fool To Christian intercessors. Follow not. I’ll have no speaking. I will have my bond.","I want my bond. I won’t listen to you. I want my bond, so stop talking. I won’t be taken for a fool who sighs and gives in to Christian meddlers. Don’t follow me. I’m not talking with you. I want my bond."
It is the most impenetrable cur That ever kept with men.,He’s the most stubborn dog that ever lived among humans.
Let him alone. He seeks my life. His reason well I know. I oft delivered from his forfeitures Many that have at times made moan to me. Therefore he hates me.,Leave him alone. I won’t follow him around with useless pleas anymore. He wants me dead. I know the real reason. I’ve often given money to people who were unable to pay back their loans to him. That’s why he hates me.
I am sure the duke,I’m sure the duke will never allow this contract to be enforced.
"The duke cannot deny the course of law. For the commodity that strangers have With us in Venice, if it be denied, Will much impeach the justice of his state, Consisteth of all nations. Therefore go. These griefs and losses have so bated me, That I shall hardly spare a pound of flesh Tomorrow to my bloody creditor.— To see me pay his debt, and then I care not.","The duke can’t deny the law, because that would threaten the security of all foreign merchants in Venice, and that’s how the city makes its money. If the government disregards the law, it will be discredited. So go. I’ve lost so much weight worrying about my losses have that I’ll hardly have a pound of flesh to spare for my bloody creditor tomorrow.—Well, jailer, let’s go.—I hope to God that Bassanio comes to see me pay his debt. After that, I don’t care what happens."
"Madam, although I speak it in your presence, You have a noble and a true conceit Of godlike amity, which appears most strongly In bearing thus the absence of your lord. How true a gentleman you send relief, How dear a lover of my lord your husband, I know you would be prouder of the work Than customary bounty can enforce you.","Madam, I hope you don’t mind my saying that I admire your noble respect for friendship, which you show in letting your husband go off to help his friend like this. If you only knew the man you’re helping out, and what a faithful gentleman he is and how much he loves your husband, I know you’d be even prouder of your kindness than you normally might be."
"Nor shall not now; for in companions That do converse and waste the time together Whose souls do bear an equal yoke of love, There must be needs a like proportion Which makes me think that this Antonio, Being the bosom lover of my lord, Must needs be like my lord. If it be so, How little is the cost I have bestowed From out the state of hellish cruelty! This comes too near the praising of myself. Therefore no more of it. Hear other things. Lorenzo, I commit into your hands Until my lord’s return.","I’ve never regretted doing good, and I don’t now. Friends who spend a lot of time together and really care equally for each other must have many traits in common. Since Antonio’s my husband’s best friend, they must be very similar men. In that case, the money I’ve sent is a small price to pay to rescue someone who resembles my Bassanio, who’s like my own soul.—Anyway, let’s change the subject, since I feel like I’m starting to flatter myself. I have a favor to ask of you. Lorenzo, please take charge of the management of my house until my husband comes back."
"For mine own part, I have toward heaven breathed a secret vow To live in prayer and contemplation, Only attended by Nerissa here There is a monastery two miles off, And there will we abide. I do desire you Not to deny this imposition, The which my love and some necessity","I’ve sworn to God that I’ll live a life of prayer and contemplation until my husband returns. Only Nerissa will keep me company. There’s a monastery two miles away where we can stay. Please say you’ll agree, because I really need you to do this."
"Madam, with all my heart. I shall obey you in all fair commands.","Madam, with all my heart. I’ll do anything you ask."
My people do already know my mind And will acknowledge you and Jessica In place of Lord Bassanio and myself.,I’ve already spoken to my staff about this. They’ll consider you and Jessica masters of this house in place of Lord Bassanio and myself. So goodbye until we meet again.
Fair thoughts and happy hours attend on you!,I hope you can relax and enjoy yourself!
I wish your ladyship all heart’s content.,"I hope you find peace and happiness, my lady."
"I thank you for your wish, and am well pleased To wish it back on you. Fare you well, Jessica.","Thank you. I wish you the same. Goodbye, Jessica."
"As I have ever found thee honest true, So let me find thee still. (gives BALTHAZAR a letter) Take this same letter, And use thou all th' endeavour of a man Into my cousin’s hands, Doctor Bellario.","Now, Balthazar, you’ve always been honest and faithful to me, and I trust you still are. (she gives BALTHAZAR a letter) Take this letter to Padua as fast as you can. Make sure you put it into the hands of my cousin Bellario, the Doctor of Laws."
"And look what notes and garments he doth give thee, Bring them, I pray thee, with imagined speed Unto the traject, to the common ferry But get thee gone. I shall be there before thee.","And as quickly as possible, take whatever letters and clothes he gives you to the public ferry that goes back and forth to Venice. Don’t waste time talking now. Just go. I’ll meet you at the ferry."
"Madam, I go with all convenient speed.","I’ll go as fast as I can, madam."
"Come on, Nerissa, I have work in hand That you yet know not of. We’ll see our husbands","Come on, Nerissa, I have many things to do that you don’t even know about yet. We’ll see our husbands before they even have a chance to miss us."
Shall they see us?,Will they see us?
"They shall, Nerissa, but in such a habit That they shall think we are accomplishèd With that we lack. I’ll hold thee any wager, When we are both accoutred like young men, And wear my dagger with the braver grace, And speak between the change of man and boy With a reed voice, and turn two mincing steps Into a manly stride, and speak of frays How honorable ladies sought my love, Which I denying, they fell sick and died— I could not do withal!—Then I’ll repent And wish for all that, that I had not killed them. That men shall swear I have discontinued school Above a twelvemonth. I have within my mind A thousand raw tricks of these bragging jacks Which I will practice.","They will, Nerissa, but we’ll be disguised as men. I’ll bet you anything that I’ll be handsomer than you when we’re both dressed up. I’ll wear my sword more gracefully, and speak like a teenage boy, and walk with a manly stride rather than my ladylike steps. I’ll talk about fights like a bragging youth, and I’ll tell cute lies about honorable ladies who fell in love with me and got sick and died when I rejected them. They just died, what could I do! Then I’ll start feeling sorry for them, wishing I hadn’t killed them. I’ll tell twenty lies like that, so men will think I graduated from school at least a year ago. I know a thousand immature tricks like that, and I’ll use them all."
"Why, shall we turn to men?","Why, are we turning to men?"
"Fie, what a question’s that If thou wert near a lewd interpreter! But come, I’ll tell thee all my whole device When I am in my coach, which stays for us For we must measure twenty miles today.","What kind of question is that! If I had a dirty mind, I’d think you meant turning to men for sex. Here, I’ll tell you my whole plan in my carriage, which is waiting for us at the gate. So hurry up, because we have twenty miles to cover today."
"Yes, truly, for look you, the sins of the father are to be laid upon the children. Therefore I promise ye I fear you. I was always plain with you, and so now I speak my agitation of the matter. Therefore be o' good cheer, for truly I think you are damned. There is but one hope in it that can do you any good, and that is but a kind of bastard hope neither.","Yes, look, it’s true that children are punished for the sins of their fathers. That’s why I’m worried about you. I’ve always been straightforward with you, so now I’m telling you what I think. Cheer up, because I think you’re going to hell. There’s only one hope for you, and even that’s a kind of illegitimate hope."
"And what hope is that, I pray thee?","What hope is that, may I ask?"
"Marry, you may partly hope that your father got you not, that you are not the Jew’s daughter.","You can hope your father isn’t your real father. Maybe your mother fooled around, and you aren’t the Jew’s daughter."
That were a kind of bastard hope indeed. So the sins of my mother should be visited upon me.,That really is an illegitimate hope. Then I’d be punished for the sins of my mother.
"Truly then I fear you are damned both by father and mother. Thus when I shun Scylla your father, I fall into Charybdis your mother. Well, you are gone both ways.","In that case I’m afraid you’re damned by both your father and your mother. When you avoid one trap, you fall into another. You’re in trouble either way."
I shall be saved by my husband. He hath made me a Christian.,My husband will save me. He’s made me a Christian.
"Truly, the more to blame he. We were Christians eno' before, e'en as many as could well live one by another. This making Christians will raise the price of hogs. If we grow all to be pork-eaters, we shall not shortly have a rasher on the coals for money.","He was wrong to do that. There were enough Christians before—as many of them as could stand to live near each other. All these new Christians will make the price of hogs go up. If we’re all pork-eaters, we won’t be able to get our hands on a slice of bacon, even if we’ve got the money for it."
"I’ll tell my husband, Launcelot, what you say. Here he comes.","I’ll tell my husband what you’ve said, Launcelot. Here he comes."
"I shall grow jealous of you shortly, Launcelot, if you thus get my wife into corners.","You’re going to make me jealous, Launcelot, if you keep taking my wife into dark corners like this!"
"Nay, you need not fear us, Lorenzo. Launcelot and I are out. He tells me flatly there is no mercy for me in heaven because I am a Jew’s daughter, and he says you are no good member of the commonwealth, for in converting Jews to Christians you raise the price of pork.","No, you don’t need to worry about us, Lorenzo. Launcelot and I can’t agree on anything. He says I won’t get into heaven because I’m a Jew’s daughter, and he says you’re irresponsible because by converting Jews to Christianity you’re raising the price of pork."
"I shall answer that better to the commonwealth than you can the getting up of the Negro’s belly. The Moor is with child by you, Launcelot.","I can justify that better than you can justify sleeping with Portia’s African servant. The Moor Like the prince of Morocco, the servant referred to is a “Moor” or North African, in this case a black woman. Launcelot puns on the words “Moor” and “more.” Moor is pregnant with your child, Launcelot."
"It is much that the Moor should be more than reason. But if she be less than an honest woman, she is indeed more than I took her for.","It’s too bad there’s more of the Moor than there ought to be. Well, even if she’s a less than honest woman, she’s still a lot more respectable than I thought at first."
"How every fool can play upon the word! I think the best grace of wit will shortly turn into silence, and discourse grow commendable in none only but parrots. Go in, sirrah. Bid them prepare for dinner.","Any fool can make puns! I think the best sign of intelligence will soon be silence, and talking will only be a good thing for parrots to do. Go in and tell the servants to get ready for dinner."
"That is done, sir. They have all stomachs.","That’s already been done, sir. They’re all ready to eat dinner."
"Goodly Lord, what a wit-snapper are you! Then bid them prepare dinner.","Good Lord, what a clown you are! Tell them to make the dinner."
"That is done too, sir. Only “Cover!” is the word.","That’s also been done, sir. The word you’re looking for is “ cover By “cover,” Launcelot means “set the table.” cover .”"
"Will you cover then, sir?","Will you cover, then?"
"Not so, sir, neither. I know my duty.","No, sir—I know my duty. Launcelot Launcelot now interprets “cover” to mean put on his hat, which he’s not supposed to do in front of his superiors. Launcelot"
"Yet more quarreling with occasion! Wilt thou show the whole wealth of thy wit in an instant? I pray thee, understand a plain man in his plain meaning. Go to thy fellows, bid them cover the table, serve in the meat, and we will come in to dinner.","You keep finding ways to mock me! Are you planning on showing me all your wit at once? Please understand my simple message: go tell the servants to set the table and bring in the food, and we’ll come in to dinner."
"For the table, sir, it shall be served in. For the meat, sir, it shall be covered. For your coming in to dinner, sir, why, let it be as humours and conceits shall govern.","About the table, sir, dinner will be served on it. As for the food, it will be served in covered dishes. As for your coming in to dinner, just do what you feel is right."
"O dear discretion, how his words are suited! An army of good words, and I do know A many fools that stand in better place, Garnished like him, that for a tricksy word Defy the matter. How cheerest thou, Jessica? How dost thou like the Lord Bassanio’s wife?","Oh, he’s good at bending words around! The fool has memorized a whole army full of fancy words. I know jesters in better positions, with the same talents he has. They also like to digress from the topic at hand by playing with language. Anyway, how are you, Jessica? And how do you like Lord Bassanio’s wife?"
"Past all expressing. It is very meet The Lord Bassanio live an upright life, For having such a blessing in his lady, And if on earth he do not merit it, In reason he should never come to heaven. Why, if two gods should play some heavenly match And on the wager lay two earthly women, Pawned with the other, for the poor rude world Hath not her fellow.","I like her more than I can say. Bassanio should live an upstanding life because having a wife like Portia is a blessing. It’s as if he found heaven here on earth. And if he doesn’t deserve this joy on earth, he’ll never deserve it in heaven. Imagine what would happen if two gods in heaven made a bet. If one of them used Portia as his stake, the other god would have a hard time coming up with a human woman to match her value. The poor rude world doesn’t have her equal."
Even such a husband Hast thou of me as she is for a wife.,"As good a wife as she is, that’s how good a husband I am to you."
"Nay, but ask my opinion too of that!",I’ll be the judge of that!
I will anon. First let us go to dinner.,I’ll give you a chance to judge later. First let’s go to dinner.
"Nay, let me praise you while I have a stomach.","No, let me say some good things about you while I’m in the mood."
"No, pray thee, let it serve for table talk. Then howsome'er thou speak’st ’mong other things I shall digest it.","No, please, save it for dinner conversation. That way, no matter what you say, I’ll digest it with everything else."
"Well, I’ll set you forth.",In that case I’ll serve you up like a dish of food.
"What, is Antonio here?",Is Antonio here?
"Ready, so please your grace.","Yes, sir, I’m here."
"I am sorry for thee. Thou art come to answer A stony adversary, an inhuman wretch From any dram of mercy.","I feel sorry for you. You’ve come to face a ruthless enemy, an inhuman wretch incapable of pity, without any feelings of mercy."
"I have heard Your grace hath ta'en great pains to qualify His rigorous course. But since he stands obdurate And that no lawful means can carry me My patience to his fury, and am armed To suffer with a quietness of spirit The very tyranny and rage of his.","They tell me you’ve done everything you can to talk him out of what he’s doing. But since he remains stubborn, and there’s no legal way to protect me from his malice, I’ll just have to take what he’ll give me. I’m ready to suffer peacefully whatever he does to me in his cruelty and anger."
"Go, one, and call the Jew into the court.",One of you go call the Jew into court here.
"He is ready at the door. He comes, my lord.","He’s standing ready outside the door. Here he comes, my lord."
"Make room, and let him stand before our face.— Shylock, the world thinks, and I think so too, That thou but lead’st this fashion of thy malice To the last hour of act, and then ’tis thought Than is thy strange apparent cruelty, And where thou now exacts the penalty— Which is a pound of this poor merchant’s flesh— Thou wilt not only loose the forfeiture Forgive a moiety of the principal, Glancing an eye of pity on his losses That have of late so huddled on his back Eno' to press a royal merchant down From brassy bosoms and rough hearts of flint, From stubborn Turks and Tartars never trained To offices of tender courtesy. We all expect a gentle answer, Jew.","Make room so he can stand in front of me. Shylock, everyone thinks—and I agree—that you’re just pretending to be cruel. They think that at the last second you’re going to show mercy and pity, which will be more surprising than the bizarre cruelty that you seem to be showing now. And even though you’re here to collect the penalty—a pound of this poor merchant’s flesh—they think you’ll not only let it go, but out of humanity and love you’ll forgive some portion of the principal he owes you too. In doing so you’ll be taking pity on him for his many recent losses, which have been large enough to send even the greatest merchant out of business, and make even the most hard-hearted Turk or Tartar feel sorry for him. What do you say? We all expect a nice answer from you, Jew."
"And by our holy Sabbath have I sworn To have the due and forfeit of my bond. If you deny it, let the danger light Upon your charter and your city’s freedom. A weight of carrion flesh than to receive Three thousand ducats. I’ll not answer that But say it is my humour. Is it answered? What if my house be troubled with a rat To have it baned? What, are you answered yet?","I’ve told you what I intend to do, and I’ve sworn by the holy Sabbath to seek the penalty that is due according to our contract. If you refuse to allow me to do so, your city’s charter and its freedom are endangered. You’re going to ask me why I’d rather have a pound of decaying flesh than three thousand ducats. I won’t answer that. Let’s just say it’s because I feel like it. Is that enough of an answer? What if I had a rat in my house, and I felt like paying ten thousand ducats to have it exterminated? Do you have your answer yet?"
"Some men there are love not a gaping pig, Some that are mad if they behold a cat, And others, when the bagpipe sings i' th' nose, Mistress of passion, sways it to the mood Of what it likes or loathes. Now, for your answer: As there is no firm reason to be rendered Why he cannot abide a gaping pig; Why he, a woollen bagpipe, but of force Must yield to such inevitable shame As to offend, himself being offended— So can I give no reason, nor I will not I bear Antonio), that I follow thus A losing suit against him. Are you answered?","Some men don’t like roast pig, others go crazy if they see a cat, and others can’t help urinating when they hear bagpipes. There’s no sense trying to explain people’s likes and dislikes. So, to answer your question. Just as there’s no clear reason why one man doesn’t want a roast pig, or why another man can’t stand a harmless and useful cat, or another can’t tolerate bagpipes, so I can’t give a reason, and I won’t give a reason (other than the simple hate and loathing I feel for Antonio) why I’m pursuing this unprofitable case against him. Does that answer your question?"
"This is no answer, thou unfeeling man, To excuse the current of thy cruelty.","That’s no answer, you heartless man. It doesn’t excuse your cruel behavior."
I am not bound to please thee with my answers.,I don’t have to give you answers that you like.
Do all men kill the things they do not love?,Does everyone kill what they don’t love?
Hates any man the thing he would not kill?,Does anyone hate something and not want to kill it?
Every offense is not a hate at first.,Disliking something isn’t the same thing as hating it.
"What, wouldst thou have a serpent sting thee twice?","What, would you let a snake bite you twice?"
"I pray you, think you question with the Jew? You may as well go stand upon the beach And bid the main flood bate his usual height. You may as well use question with the wolf",(to BASSANIO) Please don’t bother arguing with the Jew. You might as well go stand on the beach and ask the ocean to get smaller. You might as well ask a wolf why he killed the lamb and made its mother cry.
"You may as well forbid the mountain pines To wag their high tops and to make no noise When they are fretten with the gusts of heaven. You may as well do anything most hard, His Jewish heart. Therefore I do beseech you Make no more offers, use no farther means, But with all brief and plain conveniency Let me have judgment and the Jew his will.","You might as well tell the pine trees on the mountain to stop waving their treetops when the storms blow through them. You might as well do the impossible rather than try to soften his Jewish heart. It’s the hardest thing imaginable. Therefore I’m begging you, don’t make any more offers, don’t look for other ways to stop him. Just let me receive my punishment, and let the Jew take his penalty."
(to SHYLOCK) For thy three thousand ducats here is six.,"(to SHYLOCK) Instead of your three thousand ducats, here are six thousand."
"If every ducat in six thousand ducats Were in six parts, and every part a ducat, I would not draw them. I would have my bond.","If you offered me six times that, I wouldn’t accept it. I would choose to take my penalty."
"How shalt thou hope for mercy, rendering none?","How can you ever hope for mercy for yourself, when you don’t give any now?"
"You have among you many a purchased slave, Which—like your asses and your dogs and mules— You use in abject and in slavish parts Because you bought them. Shall I say to you, Why sweat they under burdens? Let their beds Be made as soft as yours and let their palates Be seasoned with such viands”? You will answer, “The slaves are ours.” So do I answer you. Is dearly bought. 'Tis mine and I will have it. If you deny me, fie upon your law— There is no force in the decrees of Venice. I stand for judgment. Answer, shall I have it?","Why should I be afraid of your judgment when I haven’t done anything wrong? Many of you own slaves, which—like your donkeys and dogs and mules—you use to perform awful jobs just because you bought them. Should I say to you, “Set them free! Let them marry your children! Why are you making them work so hard? Let their beds be as soft as yours, and let them eat the same food as you”? No, you’d answer, “The slaves are ours.” And that’s just how I’m answering you. The pound of flesh that I want from him was very expensive. It’s mine and I’m going to get it. If you refuse me, the laws of Venice have no validity. I await justice. So answer me. Will I get it?"
"Unless Bellario, a learnèd doctor, Whom I have sent for to determine this, Come here today.","I have the authority to dismiss this court, unless Bellario comes today. He’s a legal expert I sent for to act as judge and help settle this matter."
"My lord, here stays without A messenger with letters from the doctor,","My lord, a messenger is waiting outside with letters from Bellario. He’s just come from Padua."
Bring us the letter. Call the messenger.,Bring us the letters. Call the messenger in.
"Good cheer, Antonio! What, man, courage yet! The Jew shall have my flesh, blood, bones and all, Ere thou shalt lose for me one drop of blood.","Cheer up, Antonio! Keep up your courage, man! I’ll give the Jew my flesh, blood, bones, and everything before you lose one drop of blood for me."
"Meetest for death. The weakest kind of fruit Drops earliest to the ground, and so let me. You cannot better be employed, Bassanio, Than to live still and write mine epitaph.","I’m like the one sick sheep in the flock, the one who deserves to die. The weakest fruit drops to the ground first, so let me drop. Bassanio, the best thing you can do is to keep living and write an epitaph for my gravestone."
"Came you from Padua, from Bellario?",Have you come from Bellario’s office in Padua?
"From both, my lord. Bellario greets your grace. (gives DUKE a letter)","Yes, my lord. Bellario sends his greetings. (she gives the DUKE a letter)"
(to SHYLOCK) Why dost thou whet thy knife so earnestly?,(to SHYLOCK) Why are you sharpening your knife so eagerly?
To cut the forfeiture from that bankrupt there.,To cut my penalty from that bankrupt man over there.
"Thou makest thy knife keen. But no metal can— No, not the hangman’s axe—bear half the keenness Of thy sharp envy. Can no prayers pierce thee?","You’re sharpening that knife not on your sole but on your soul, you cruel Jew. No metal—not even the executioner’s axe—could ever be half as sharp as your hatred. Can’t any prayers reach your heart?"
"No, none that thou hast wit enough to make.","No, none that you’re smart enough to make."
"And for thy life let justice be accused! Thou almost makest me waver in my faith To hold opinion with Pythagoras That souls of animals infuse themselves Governed a wolf who, hanged for human slaughter, Even from the gallows did his fell soul fleet, And whilst thou layest in thy unhallowed dam Infused itself in thee, for thy desires","Oh, you’re going to hell, you disgusting dog. Killing you would be justice. You almost make me forget that I’m a Christian. You make me want to agree with the philosopher Pythagoras that animal souls are reincarnated in human bodies. Your vicious dog soul used to belong to a wolf that was killed for slaughtering humans. When he died, his cruel soul passed out of his body and went into yours while you were lying in your unholy mother’s womb. That’s why your desires are wolfish, bloody, and ravenous."
"Till thou canst rail the seal from off my bond, Thou but offend’st thy lungs to speak so loud. Repair thy wit, good youth, or it will fall To cureless ruin. I stand here for law.","Unless your taunts can undo the signature on my contract, you’re just wearing out your lungs by speaking so loud. Be quiet, boy, or you’ll lose your mind. I stand here with the law on my side."
A young and learnèd doctor to our court. Where is he?,This letter from Bellario introduces us to a young and well-educated legal expert. Where is he?
He attendeth here hard by To know your answer whether you’ll admit him.,He’s waiting nearby to find out if you’ll invite him in.
"With all my heart.—Some three or four of you Meantime the court shall hear Bellario’s letter. (reads) “Your grace shall understand that at the receipt of your letter I am very sick, but in the instant that your messenger came, in loving visitation was with me a young doctor of Rome. His name is Balthazar. I acquainted him with the cause in controversy between the Jew and Antonio the merchant. We turned o'er many books together. He is furnished with my opinion, which—bettered with his own learning, the greatness whereof I cannot enough commend—comes with him at my importunity to fill up your grace’s request in my stead.I beseech you, let his lack of years be no impediment to let him lack a reverend estimation, for I never knew so young a body with so old a head. I leave him to your gracious acceptance, whose trial shall better publish his commendation.”","With all my heart.—Three or four of you go welcome him.—In the meantime, I’ll read Bellario’s letter out loud. (he reads) “I’ve received your letter but I’m very sick at the moment. As it happened, when your messenger came, a young lawyer from Rome was visiting me. His name is Balthazar. I told him about the case of the Jew and Antonio the merchant, and we consulted many books together. He knows my legal opinions about this matter, and he has his own expert opinions as well. I’m sending him in my place to answer your request for someone to act as judge in this matter. Please don’t underestimate him because he’s so young. I never knew such a young man with such a mature head. I leave him to you. When you put him to the test, you’ll see how wonderful he really is. You hear what the wise and educated Bellario writes.”"
"You hear the learned Bellario, what he writes. And here I take it is the doctor come.— Give me your hand. Come you from old Bellario?","And this is the legal professor, I take it.—Let me shake your hand. Did old Bellario send you here?"
"I did, my lord.","Yes, my lord."
You are welcome. Take your place. That holds this present question in the court?,Welcome. Please have a seat. Are you familiar with the case currently before the court?
"I am informèd thoroughly of the cause. Which is the merchant here, and which the Jew?","Yes, thoroughly. Which one is the merchant? And which one is the Jew?"
"Antonio and old Shylock, both stand forth.","Antonio and Shylock, both of you come forward."
Is your name Shylock?,Is your name Shylock?
Shylock is my name.,Shylock is my name.
"Of a strange nature is the suit you follow, Yet in such rule that the Venetian law Cannot impugn you as you do proceed.— (to ANTONIO) You stand within his danger, do you not?","Your case is most unusual, though the Venetian law can’t stop you from proceeding.—(to ANTONIO) He has a claim on you, correct?"
"Ay, so he says.","Yes, so he says."
Do you confess the bond?,Do you acknowledge the contract?
I do.,"Yes, I do."
Then must the Jew be merciful.,Then the Jew must show you mercy.
On what compulsion must I? Tell me that.,Why do I have to do that? Tell me.
"The quality of mercy is not strained. It droppeth as the gentle rain from heaven It blesseth him that gives and him that takes. 'Tis mightiest in the mightiest. It becomes The thronèd monarch better than his crown. His scepter shows the force of temporal power, Wherein doth sit the dread and fear of kings, But mercy is above this sceptered sway. It is enthronèd in the hearts of kings. It is an attribute to God himself. When mercy seasons justice. Therefore, Jew,","No one shows mercy because he has to. It just happens, the way gentle rain drops on the ground. Mercy is a double blessing. It blesses the one who gives it and the one who receives it. It’s strongest in the strongest people. It looks better in a king than his own crown looks on him. The king’s scepter represents his earthly power, the symbol of majesty, the focus of royal authority. But mercy is higher than the scepter. It’s enthroned in the hearts of kings, a quality of God himself. Kingly power seems most like God’s power when the king mixes mercy with justice. So although justice is your plea, Jew, consider this."
"Though justice be thy plea, consider this— That in the course of justice none of us Should see salvation. We do pray for mercy, The deeds of mercy. I have spoke thus much To mitigate the justice of thy plea, Which if thou follow, this strict court of Venice Must needs give sentence 'gainst the merchant there.","Justice won’t save our souls. We pray for mercy, and this same prayer teaches us to show mercy to others as well. I’ve told you this to make you give up this case. If you pursue it, this strict court of Venice will need to carry out the sentence against the merchant there."
"The penalty, and forfeit of my bond.","I take all responsibility for my decisions. I want the law, the penalty, and the fulfillment of my contract."
Is he not able to discharge the money?,Can’t he pay back the money?
"Yes, here I tender it for him in the court— Yea, twice the sum. If that will not suffice, On forfeit of my hands, my head, my heart. If this will not suffice, it must appear That malice bears down truth.— (to DUKE) And I beseech you, To do a great right, do a little wrong, And curb this cruel devil of his will.","Yes. I’m offering to pay it back right this moment—even twice the sum. If that’s not enough, I’ll sign a contract to pay ten times that much, and I’ll give you my hands, my head, and my heart as security. If that’s not enough, then you’re just evil and malicious.—(to the DUKE) I beg you, just this once, use your authority to bend the law. Do a great right by doing a little wrong. Don’t let this devil have his way."
It must not be. There is no power in Venice Can alter a decree establishèd. And many an error by the same example Will rush into the state. It cannot be.,"That can’t happen. There’s no power in Venice that can change an established decree. The change will be recorded as a precedent, and many bad legal decisions will result. That can’t happen."
"A Daniel come to judgment, yea, a Daniel!— O wise young judge, how I do honor thee!","A Daniel In the Bible, as a young man, Daniel shows great wisdom while acting as judge in the case of Susanna, who was falsely accused. Daniel has come to judgment, yes, a Daniel!—Oh, wise young judge, I honor you!"
"I pray you, let me look upon the bond.","Please, let me review the contract."
"(giving PORTIA a document) Here ’tis, most reverend doctor, here it is.","(he hands PORTIA a paper) Here it is, judge, here it is."
"Shylock, there’s thrice thy money offered thee.","Shylock, they’re offering you three times the money you lent."
"An oath, an oath, I have an oath in heaven. No, not for Venice.","But I made an oath, an oath, an oath in heaven. Should I perjure my soul by disobeying it? No, not for all of Venice."
"Why, this bond is forfeit! And lawfully by this the Jew may claim A pound of flesh to be by him cut off Nearest the merchant’s heart.—Be merciful.","The money wasn’t paid back! And so the Jew may lawfully claim a pound of flesh nearest the merchant’s heart, to be cut off by him.—But please have mercy. Take three times your money. Tell me to tear up this contract."
"When it is paid according to the tenor. It doth appear you are a worthy judge. You know the law. Your exposition Hath been most sound. I charge you by the law, Proceed to judgment. By my soul I swear There is no power in the tongue of man To alter me. I stay here on my bond.",I’ll tear it up when it’s paid. You seem like a good judge. You know the law. Your explanation has made sense. I urge you to deliver your verdict. I swear that nothing anyone can say will change my mind. I’m sticking to the contract.
Most heartily I do beseech the court,I beg the court to deliver the verdict.
"Why then, thus it is: You must prepare your bosom for his knife.","Well, then, here it is: you must prepare yourself for his knife."
O noble judge! O excellent young man!,"Oh, good judge! Oh, you excellent young man!"
"For the intent and purpose of the law Hath full relation to the penalty,","The law fully authorizes the penalty, which you have to pay according to the contract."
'Tis very true. O wise and upright judge! How much more elder art thou than thy looks!,Very true. Oh wise judge! You’re so much older than you look!
(to ANTONIO) Therefore lay bare your bosom.,(to ANTONIO) So bare your chest.
"Ay, his breast. So says the bond. Doth it not, noble judge?","Yes, his chest! That’s what the contract says, doesn’t it, judge? “Nearest his heart.”—Those are the very words."
It is so. Are there balance here to weigh The flesh?,Yes. Is there a scale here to weigh the flesh?
I have them ready.,I have it ready.
"Have by some surgeon, Shylock, on your charge, To stop his wounds lest he do bleed to death.","Pay a surgeon to stand by and bind his wounds, Shylock, so he doesn’t bleed to death."
Is it so nominated in the bond?,Is that called for in the contract?
"It is not so expressed, but what of that? 'Twere good you do so much for charity.","Not explicitly, but so what? It wouldn’t hurt you to be charitable."
I cannot find it. 'Tis not in the bond.,I can’t find it. It’s not in the contract.
"(to ANTONIO) You, merchant, have you any thing to say?","(to ANTONIO) You, merchant, do you have anything to say?"
"Give me your hand, Bassanio. Fare you well.","Not much. I’m ready and waiting.—Give me your hand, Bassanio. Goodbye."
"Grieve not that I am fall'n to this for you, For herein Fortune shows herself more kind Than is her custom. It is still her use To view with hollow eye and wrinkled brow An age of poverty—from which lingering penance Of such misery doth she cut me off. Commend me to your honorable wife. Say how I loved you. Speak me fair in death. And when the tale is told, bid her be judge Whether Bassanio had not once a love. Repent but you that you shall lose your friend, For if the Jew do cut but deep enough, I’ll pay it presently with all my heart.","Don’t be sad that this happened because of you, because Lady Luck’s been nicer to me than usual. Usually she makes the unhappy man live on after he loses his wealth, to spend his old age in poverty. But in my case she’s letting me avoid that misery. Send your honorable wife my greetings, and tell her how I died and how I loved you. Speak well of me after I’m dead, and when the tale’s done, ask her to judge whether Bassanio had a friend. Be sad only at the fact that you’ll lose your friend—your friend doesn’t regret that he paid your debt. If the Jew cuts deep enough, I’ll pay it instantly with all my heart."
"Antonio, I am married to a wife Which is as dear to me as life itself. Are not with me esteemed above thy life. I would lose all—ay, sacrifice them all Here to this devil—to deliver you.","Antonio, I married a woman as dear to me as life itself. But life itself, my wife, and the whole world aren’t more valuable to me than your life is. I’d give it all up—yes, I’d sacrifice them all to this devil here—to save you."
Your wife would give you little thanks for that,Your wife wouldn’t like it if she were here to hear you make that offer.
"I have a wife, whom I protest I love. I would she were in heaven, so she could Entreat some power to change this currish Jew.",I have a wife I love. I wish she were in heaven so she could appeal to some power to make this dog Jew change his mind.
'Tis well you offer it behind her back.,It’s nice you’re offering to sacrifice her behind her back. That wish of yours could start quite an argument back at home.
"These be the Christian husbands. I have a daughter. Would any of the stock of Barabbas Had been her husband rather than a Christian!— We trifle time. I pray thee, pursue sentence.","That’s what you get for marrying Christian husbands. I have a daughter. I wish she’d married any one of Barabbas’s In the Bible, Barabbas is a thief who is set free at the same time that Jesus is condemned to death. Barabbas’s descendants instead of a Christian!—We’re wasting time. Please, deliver the sentence."
"The court awards it, and the law doth give it.",A pound of this merchant’s flesh is yours. The court awards it and the law authorizes it.
Most rightful judge!,What a righteous judge!
"And you must cut this flesh from off his breast. The law allows it, and the court awards it.","And you have to cut this flesh from his chest. The law allows it, and the court awards it."
"Most learnèd judge, a sentence! Come, prepare.","What a wise judge! Come on, get ready."
"Tarry a little. There is something else. This bond doth give thee here no jot of blood. The words expressly are “a pound of flesh.” Take then thy bond, take thou thy pound of flesh, One drop of Christian blood, thy lands and goods Are by the laws of Venice confiscate Unto the state of Venice.","But wait a moment. There’s something else. This contract doesn’t give you any blood at all. The words expressly specify “a pound of flesh.” So take your penalty of a pound of flesh, but if you shed one drop of Christian blood when you cut it, the state of Venice will confiscate your land and property under Venetian law."
"O upright judge!—Mark, Jew.—O learnèd judge!","Oh, what an upright judge!—Pay attention, Jew.—Oh, what a smart judge!"
Is that the law?,Is that the law?
"Thyself shalt see the act. For as thou urgest justice, be assured Thou shalt have justice more than thou desirest.","You can see for yourself. You asked for justice, so rest assured you’ll get more justice than you bargained for."
"O learnèd judge!—Mark, Jew, a learnèd judge!","Oh, what a wise judge!—Pay attention, Jew. A wise judge!"
And let the Christian go.,In that case I’ll take their offer. Pay me three times the amount of the loan and let the Christian go.
Here is the money.,Here is the money.
"Soft! The Jew shall have all justice. Soft, no haste. He shall have nothing but the penalty.","Wait! The Jew will have justice. Wait, don’t rush! He’s not getting anything except the penalty."
"O Jew! An upright judge, a learnèd judge!","Oh, Jew, what an upright judge this is! What a wise judge!"
"Therefore prepare thee to cut off the flesh. Shed thou no blood, nor cut thou less nor more But just a pound of flesh. If thou takest more Or less than a just pound, be it but so much Or the division of the twentieth part Of one poor scruple—nay, if the scale do turn But in the estimation of a hair, Thou diest and all thy goods are confiscate.","So get ready to cut off the flesh. Don’t shed any blood, or cut less or more than exactly a pound of flesh. If you take more or less than exactly a pound, even if it’s just the tiniest fraction of an ounce—if the scale changes by even so much as a hair, you die, and all your property will be confiscated."
"Now, infidel, I have you on the hip.","A second Daniel!—A Daniel, Jew! I’ve got you now, pagan."
Why doth the Jew pause? Take thy forfeiture.,Why is the Jew waiting? Take your penalty.
"Give me my principal, and let me go.",Give me my money and let me go.
I have it ready for thee. Here it is.,I have it ready for you. Here it is.
He shall have merely justice and his bond.,"No, he refused it publicly, in open court. He will have only justice and his penalty."
"A Daniel, still say I, a second Daniel!— I thank thee, Jew, for teaching me that word.","A Daniel, I keep saying it! A second Daniel!—Thank you, Jew, for teaching me that word."
Shall I not have barely my principal?,I won’t even get the original three thousand ducats back?
"To be so taken at thy peril, Jew.","You can’t have anything but the penalty, to be taken at your peril, Jew."
"Why then, the devil give him good of it! I’ll stay no longer question.","Well, then, I hope he chokes on it! I’m not staying here to argue anymore."
"Tarry, Jew. The law hath yet another hold on you. If it be proved against an alien That by direct or indirect attempts He seek the life of any citizen, The party 'gainst the which he doth contrive Comes to the privy coffer of the state, And the offender’s life lies in the mercy Of the Duke only 'gainst all other voice. In which predicament I say thou stand’st, That indirectly—and directly too— Thou hast contrived against the very life Of the defendant, and thou hast incurred The danger formerly by me rehearsed.","Wait a minute, Jew. The law has another hold on you. The laws of Venice state that if a foreign resident directly or indirectly attempts to kill any citizen, the person he tried to kill will receive one half of the foreigner’s goods. The other half goes to the state. Whether the offending person lives or dies is up to the duke—there’s no one else to appeal to. In your predicament you’ve earned that punishment, because you’ve clearly contrived indirectly—and directly too—to take the life of the defendant. So get down on your knees and beg mercy from the duke."
"Beg that thou mayst have leave to hang thyself, And yet, thy wealth being forfeit to the state, Thou hast not left the value of a cord. Therefore thou must be hanged at the state’s charge.","Beg to be allowed to hang yourself! But if you’ve handed over all your wealth to the state, you don’t even have enough money left to buy a rope. So you’ll be hanged at the state’s expense."
"I pardon thee thy life before thou ask it. For half thy wealth, it is Antonio’s. The other half comes to the general state, Which humbleness may drive unto a fine.","I want you to see the difference between us, so I pardon you even before you ask for a pardon. Half of your wealth goes to Antonio. The other half goes to the state. However, if you show a proper humility, I may reduce this penalty to a fine."
"Ay, for the state, not for Antonio.","Yes, the state’s half can be reduced, but not Antonio’s."
"Nay, take my life and all. Pardon not that. You take my house when you do take the prop That doth sustain my house. You take my life When you do take the means whereby I live.","No, go ahead and take my life. Don’t pardon that. You take my house away when you take the money I need for upkeep. You take my life when you take away my means of making a living."
"What mercy can you render him, Antonio?","What mercy can you show him, Antonio?"
"A halter gratis, nothing else, for God’s sake.","A hangman’s rope free of charge. Nothing else, for God’s sake!"
"So please my lord the duke and all the court, To quit the fine for one half of his goods I am content, so he will let me have Upon his death unto the gentleman That lately stole his daughter. Two things provided more: that for this favor He presently become a Christian; Here in the court, of all he dies possessed, Unto his son Lorenzo and his daughter.","If the duke and his court agree to set aside the fine for one half of his property, I’m happy, as long as he lets me have the other half in trust, to give it to the gentleman who recently stole his daughter. I only ask two more things. First, Shylock must immediately become a Christian. Second, he must make a will here in this court that leaves all his property to his son-in-law Lorenzo and his daughter when he dies."
"He shall do this, or else I do recant The pardon that I late pronouncèd here.","He must do this, or I’ll recant the pardon I just delivered."
"Art thou contented, Jew? What dost thou say?","Are you satisfied, Jew? What do you say?"
I am content.,I’m satisfied.
"(to NERISSA) Clerk, draw a deed of gift.","(to NERISSA) Clerk, draw up a document to make his gift official."
"I pray you, give me leave to go from hence. I am not well. Send the deed after me,",Please let me go. I’m not well. Send the deed after me and I’ll sign it.
"Get thee gone, but do it.","Go, but sign the deed."
"(to SHYLOCK) In christening shalt thou have two godfathers. Had I been judge, thou shouldst have had ten more— To bring thee to the gallows, not to the font.","(to SHYLOCK) When you’re baptized a Christian, you’ll have two godfathers. If I’d been the judge, you would’ve had ten more—twelve jurors to sentence you to death rather than baptism."
"(to PORTIA) Sir, I entreat you home with me to dinner.","(to PORTIA) Sir, please come home with me to dinner."
"I humbly do desire your grace of pardon. I must away this night toward Padua, And it is meet I presently set forth.","I’m very sorry, sir, but I have to go to Padua tonight. I should really leave right away."
I am sorry that your leisure serves you not.— For in my mind you are much bound to him.,"I’m sorry you don’t have time.—Antonio, give this gentleman a reward. In my opinion, you owe him a lot."
"(to PORTIA) Most worthy gentleman, I and my friend Have by your wisdom been this day acquitted Of grievous penalties, in lieu whereof We freely cope your courteous pains withal.","(to PORTIA) Sir, thanks to you my friend and I have been freed from paying some awful penalties today. Instead of giving the Jew the three thousand ducats he’s owed, we give it to you in gratitude for your kind efforts."
"And stand indebted, over and above, In love and service to you evermore.",And even then we’re still indebted to you. We owe you love and service forever.
"He is well paid that is well satisfied. And therein do account myself well paid. My mind was never yet more mercenary. I pray you, know me when we meet again. I wish you well, and so I take my leave.","Being satisfied with a job well done is payment enough. In saving you I consider myself well paid. My thoughts were never on money. I hope you’ll recognize me when we meet again. I wish you well. Now, I’ve got to go."
"Take some remembrance of us as a tribute, Not as a fee. Grant me two things, I pray you: Not to deny me, and to pardon me.","Sir, I really feel the need to give you something. Take some memento from us as a token of our gratitude, not as a fee. Please do two favors for me. First, don’t refuse me, and second, excuse me for insisting."
"You press me far and therefore I will yield. Give me your gloves. I’ll wear them for your sake. (to BASSANIO) And for your love, I’ll take this ring from you. Do not draw back your hand. I’ll take no more,","Since you keep insisting, I’ll do as you say. (to ANTONIO) Give me your gloves. I’ll wear them for your sake. (to BASSANIO) And as a souvenir of your appreciation, I’ll take this ring from you. Don’t pull your hand back. I won’t take anything more than this, and you can’t refuse me this."
"This ring, good sir—alas, it is a trifle. I will not shame myself to give you this.","This ring, sir—oh no, it’s nothing. I’d be ashamed to give you this."
I will have nothing else but only this. And now methinks I have a mind to it.,"I don’t want anything but that. Now that I think about it, I really want it."
"The dearest ring in Venice will I give you, And find it out by proclamation. Only for this, I pray you, pardon me.","There’s more to this ring than its cash value. I’ll give you the most expensive ring in Venice, and I’ll make a public announcement to help me find it. But as for this ring, please excuse me."
"I see, sir, you are liberal in offers. You teach me how a beggar should be answered.","I see you like to make big offers, sir. First you taught me how to beg, and now I think you’re teaching me how a beggar should be answered."
"Good sir, this ring was given me by my wife. And when she put it on, she made me vow That I should neither sell nor give nor lose it.","Good sir, this ring was given to me by my wife. When she put it on my finger, she made me swear never to sell it, give it away, or lose it."
"An if your wife be not a madwoman, And know how well I have deserved the ring, She would not hold out enemy forever For giving it to me. Well, peace be with you.","Many men use that excuse to avoid giving gifts. If your wife’s not a madwoman, and you tell her how much I deserve this ring, she won’t stay angry at you forever if you give it to me. Well, anyway, goodbye."
Let his deservings and my love withal Be valued against your wife’s commandment.,"Bassanio, let him have the ring. Consider how much he deserves it, and weigh that, along with my friendship, against your wife’s order."
"(giving GRATIANO the ring) Go, Gratiano, run and overtake him. Unto Antonio’s house. Away, make haste.","(he gives GRATIANO the ring) Go, Gratiano, run and catch up with him. Give him the ring, and take him to Antonio’s house if you can. Go quickly."
"Come, you and I will thither presently. And in the morning early will we both Fly toward Belmont. Come, Antonio.","Come on, you and I will go soon. Early in the morning we’ll both rush to Belmont. Come on, Antonio."
"Inquire the Jew’s house out. Give him this deed, And let him sign it. We’ll away tonight, And be a day before our husbands home. This deed will be well welcome to Lorenzo.",Find out where the Jew’s house is. Give him this deed and have him sign it. We’ll leave tonight and be home a day before our husbands get back. Lorenzo will be happy with what we’ve done.
"Fair sir, you are well o'erta'en. My Lord Bassanio upon more advice Hath sent you here this ring, and doth entreat Your company at dinner.","(he gives PORTIA BASSANIO’s ring) Sir, you’re lucky I caught up with you. Bassanio thought about it some more and sent this ring to you. He would like to invite you to dinner."
"That cannot be. And so I pray you tell him. Furthermore, I pray you show my youth old Shylock’s house.",I can’t have dinner with him. Please tell him I accept his ring with thanks. And could you please take my servant to old Shylock’s house?
That will I do.,I’ll do that.
"(to PORTIA) Sir, I would speak with you. I’ll see if I can get my husband’s ring, Which I did make him swear to keep for ever.","(to PORTIA) Sir, may I speak with you? (speaking so that only PORTIAcan hear) I’ll see if I can get my husband’s ring, which I made him swear to keep forever."
"(aside to NERISSA) Thou mayst, I warrant. We shall have old swearing But we’ll outface them, and outswear them too.—",(to NERISSA) I bet you’ll be able to. They’ll swear they gave the rings to men. But we’ll deny it and outswear them too.—
"Away, make haste. Thou know’st where I will tarry.","Go, hurry. You know where I’ll be waiting."
"(to GRATIANO) Come, good sir. Will you show me to this house?","(to GRATIANO) Sir, will you show me to Shylock’s house now?"
"The moon shines bright. In such a night as this, When the sweet wind did gently kiss the trees And they did make no noise, in such a night Troilus methinks mounted the Trojan walls Where Cressid lay that night.","The moon’s bright tonight. I think that on a night like this, when the wind blew the trees so gently that they didn’t make a sound, Troilus Troilus was the son of King Priam of Troy. His lover, Cressida, was sent to the Greek camp, where she betrayed him. Troilus climbed up onto the walls of Troy and sighed for Cressida in the Greek camp."
In such a night Did Thisbe fearfully o'ertrip the dew And saw the lion’s shadow ere himself And ran dismayed away.,"On a night like this, Thisbe Thisbe had agreed to meet her lover Pyramus, but was frightened away by a lion. Pyramus killed himself because he thought the lion had eaten her, and Thisbe killed herself when she found Pyramus dead. Thisbe saw the lion’s shadow and ran away in fear."
"In such a night Upon the wild sea banks, and waft her love To come again to Carthage.","On a night like this, Dido Dido, the queen of Carthage, was abandoned by her lover Aeneas. Dido stood holding a willow branch on the seashore, begging her lover to come back to her in Carthage."
In such a night Medea gathered the enchanted herbs That did renew old Æson.,"On a night like this, Medea Medea used her magic to help her lover, Jason’s father. Later, Jason betrayed her, and she murdered their children in revenge. Medea gathered magic herbs to rejuvenate old Aeson."
In such a night And with an unthrift love did run from Venice As far as Belmont.,"On a night like this, Jessica ran away from the wealthy Jew and stole his money. She ran away from Venice all the way to Belmont with her spendthrift lover."
"In such a night Did young Lorenzo swear he loved her well, Stealing her soul with many vows of faith,","On a night like this, young Lorenzo swore he loved her very much, stealing her heart with vows of love, but not one vow was true."
"In such a night Did pretty Jessica, like a little shrew, Slander her love, and he forgave it her.","On a night like this, pretty Jessica, in a bad mood, said outrageously wrong things about her lover, and he forgave her."
"I would outnight you, did nobody come. But, hark, I hear the footing of a man.","I’d get the better of you in this storytelling game, but somebody’s coming. I hear his footsteps."
Who comes so fast in silence of the night?,"Who are you, coming so fast in this quiet night?"
A friend.,A friend.
"A friend? What friend? Your name, I pray you, friend?","A friend? What friend? What’s your name, please, friend?"
"Stephano is my name, and I bring word My mistress will before the break of day By holy crosses, where she kneels and prays For happy wedlock hours.","My name’s Stephano, and I’ve come to tell you my mistress will arrive here at Belmont before sunrise. She’s still at the monastery, kneeling and praying for a happy marriage."
Who comes with her?,Who’s coming with her?
"None but a holy hermit and her maid. I pray you, is my master yet returned?",No one except her maid and a holy hermit. Has my master returned yet?
"But go we in, I pray thee, Jessica, And ceremoniously let us prepare Some welcome for the mistress of the house.","No, he hasn’t, and we haven’t heard from him.—But let’s go in, Jessica. We’ll get ready to welcome the mistress of the house back home."
"Sola, sola! Wo, ha, ho! Sola, sola!","Hey, hey! Hey! Yoo-hoo!"
Who calls?,Who’s shouting?
"Sola! Did you see Master Lorenzo? Master Lorenzo, sola, sola!","Hey! Have you seen Master Lorenzo! Master Lorenzo, hey! Hey!"
"Leave holloaing, man. Here.","Stop hollering, man! I’m here."
"Sola! Where, where?","Hey! Where, where?"
Here.,Here.
Tell him there’s a post come from my master with his horn full of good news. My master will be here ere morning.,Tell him a messenger has arrived from my master with good news. My master will be here in the morning.
"Sweet soul, let’s in, and there expect their coming. And yet no matter. Why should we go in?— My friend Stephano, signify, I pray you, And bring your music forth into the air.","My dear, let’s go inside and wait for them to arrive. But I guess it doesn’t matter. Why should we go in?—Stephano, tell the household staff that your mistress is about to arrive, and bring some musicians outside here."
"How sweet the moonlight sleeps upon this bank! Here will we sit and let the sounds of music Creep in our ears. Soft stillness and the night Sit, Jessica. Look how the floor of heaven Is thick inlaid with patens of bright gold. There’s not the smallest orb which thou behold’st But in his motion like an angel sings, Such harmony is in immortal souls, But whilst this muddy vesture of decay Doth grossly close it in, we cannot hear it.","How beautiful the moonlight’s shining on this bank! Let’s sit here and let the music fill our ears. Stillness and nighttime are perfect for beautiful music. Sit down, Jessica. Look at the stars, see how the floor of heaven is inlaid with small disks of bright gold. Stars and planets move in such perfect harmony that some believe you can hear music in their movement. If you believe this, even the smallest star sings like an angel in its motion. Souls have that same kind of harmony. But because we’re here on earth in our earthly bodies, we can’t hear it."
"Come ho, and wake Diana with a hymn! And draw her home with music.",Wake up the moon goddess with a hymn! Get her attention and draw her home with music.
I am never merry when I hear sweet music.,I’m never in the mood to laugh when I hear sweet music.
"The reason is your spirits are attentive. For do but note a wild and wanton herd, Fetching mad bounds, bellowing and neighing loud, Which is the hot condition of their blood— If they but hear perchance a trumpet sound, Or any air of music touch their ears, Their savage eyes turned to a modest gaze By the sweet power of music.","That’s because your soul is paying attention to the music. Take a wild herd of animals, or young untrained colts, leaping around like crazy, roaring and neighing loudly, which they have to do because it’s in their blood—but if they happen to hear a trumpet, or any kind of music, they all stand still. Sweet music makes their wild eyes peaceful. That’s why the poet Ovid wrote that the great musician Orpheus could make"
"Therefore the poet Did feign that Orpheus drew trees, stones, and floods Since naught so stockish, hard, and full of rage, The man that hath no music in himself, Nor is not moved with concord of sweet sounds, Is fit for treasons, stratagems, and spoils. The motions of his spirit are dull as night, Let no such man be trusted. Mark the music.","trees, stones, and rivers come to him by playing music. There’s nothing in the world that can resist music. The man who can’t be moved by the harmonious melodies is fit only for treason, violence, and pillage. His soul is as dull as night and dark as the underworld. Nobody like that should be trusted. Pay attention to the music."
That light we see is burning in my hall. How far that little candle throws his beams! So shines a good deed in a naughty world.,That light we see is coming from my hall. Look how far that little candle sends its light! That’s the way a good deed shines in a naughty world.
When the moon shone we did not see the candle.,While the moon was shining we didn’t even notice the candle.
"So doth the greater glory dim the less. A substitute shines brightly as a king Until a king be by, and then his state Empties itself, as doth an inland brook","Well, brighter lights always dim the smaller ones. A governor shines as brightly as a king until a king is near by, and the governor suddenly looks like a nobody. Music, listen!"
"It is your music, madam, of the house.","It’s your music, madam, from your house."
"Nothing is good, I see, without respect. Methinks it sounds much sweeter than by day.",Now I see that you can’t call anything good except in right context. I think that music sounds much better at night than it does during the day.
"Silence bestows that virtue on it, madam.",The night’s silence makes it sound better.
"When neither is attended, and I think The nightingale, if she should sing by day When every goose is cackling, would be thought No better a musician than the wren. To their right praise and true perfection! Peace! How the moon sleeps with Endymion And would not be awaked.","The crow sings as well as the lark when no one’s listening. If the nightingale sang during the day, when every goose is honking, nobody would think it sang any better than a wren. How many things in life seem good to us because of when they happen! Quiet now! Look how the moon seems to be sleeping with its lover and can’t be awoken!"
"That is the voice, Or I am much deceived, of Portia.","If I’m not mistaken, that’s Portia’s voice."
By the bad voice.,He recognizes me like a blind man recognizes a cuckoo—by its bad voice.
"Dear lady, welcome home.","Dear lady, welcome home."
"We have been praying for our husbands' welfare, Which speed, we hope, the better for our words.",We’ve been praying for our husbands' welfare. We hope they’re better off because of our prayers. Have they come back?
"Madam, they are not yet, But there is come a messenger before To signify their coming.","No, ma'am, they haven’t. But a messenger came ahead to tell us they were on their way."
"Go in, Nerissa. Give order to my servants that they take No note at all of our being absent hence.—","Go inside, Nerissa. Tell my servants not to mention that we were gone. You must not, either, Lorenzo—or you, Jessica."
"Your husband is at hand. I hear his trumpet. We are no tell-tales, madam. Fear you not.","Your husband’s near. I hear his trumpet. We’re not tattle-tales, madam, don’t worry."
This night methinks is but the daylight sick. It looks a little paler. 'Tis a day,I think this night is just like sick daylight. It only looks a little paler. It looks like a day when the sun is hidden.
"(to PORTIA) We should hold day with the Antipodes, If you would walk in absence of the sun.","(to PORTIA) If you walked outside at night, it would be daylight here at the same time as on the other side of the world."
"Let me give light, but let me not be light. For a light wife doth make a heavy husband, But God sort all! You are welcome home, my lord.","I’ll give light “Light” could mean having loose morals. light to men, but I’ll never be light or unchaste. An unfaithful wife makes a husband worry, and I’ll never let Bassanio worry if I can help it. I hope God figures it all out! Welcome home, my husband."
"I thank you, madam. Give welcome to my friend. This is the man, this is Antonio, To whom I am so infinitely bound.","Thank you, darling. I’d like to introduce you to my friend. This is Antonio, my dearest friend. We are closely tied."
For as I hear he was much bound for you.,"You should be tied to him, since he tied himself up so much for you."
No more than I am well acquitted of.,But I’ve been paid back well.
"Sir, you are very welcome to our house. It must appear in other ways than words,","Sir, welcome to our house. But action speaks louder than words, so I’ll cut short these polite words."
"(to NERISSA) By yonder moon I swear you do me wrong. In faith, I gave it to the judge’s clerk. Would he were gelt that had it, for my part, Since you do take it, love, so much at heart.","(to NERISSA) I swear by that moon over there that you’re doing me wrong! I’m telling the truth! I gave it to the judge’s clerk. I wish the guy I gave it to had been castrated, since you’re getting so upset about it."
"A quarrel, ho, already? What’s the matter?","What, an argument already? What’s the matter?"
"About a hoop of gold, a paltry ring That she did give me, whose posy was For all the world like cutler’s poetry Upon a knife, “Love me and leave me not.”","We’re arguing about a hoop of gold, a cheap little ring she gave me, that had a little inscription on it, nothing more than a knife-maker’s attempt at poetry. It said, “Love me and don’t leave me.”"
"You swore to me when I did give it you That you would wear it till your hour of death, And that it should lie with you in your grave. Though not for me, yet for your vehement oaths, Gave it a judge’s clerk! No, God’s my judge. The clerk will ne'er wear hair on ’s face that had it.","How can you talk about the quality of the poem or the value of the ring? You swore to me when I gave it to you that you would wear it till you died, and that it would be buried with you. If you didn’t want to take care of it for my sake, you should have just because you made so many vows that you’d take care of it. And now you claim you gave it to a judge’s clerk! No, I swear to God that clerk will never grow a beard on his face."
"He will, an if he live to be a man.",He will if he lives long enough to become a man.
"Ay, if a woman live to be a man.","Yes, if a woman grows up to be a man."
"A kind of boy, a little scrubbèd boy No higher than thyself, the judge’s clerk, A prating boy that begged it as a fee. I could not for my heart deny it him.","I swear I gave it to a youth, a kind of boy, a little stunted boy, no taller than yourself. He was the judge’s clerk, a chatty boy who wanted it as a fee. I didn’t have the heart to say no to him."
"To part so slightly with your wife’s first gift, A thing stuck on with oaths upon your finger And so riveted with faith unto your flesh.","I have to be honest with you. You were wrong to give away your wife’s first gift so thoughtlessly, a thing you swore to keep on your finger and bound faithfully to your body."
"I gave my love a ring and made him swear I dare be sworn for him he would not leave it Nor pluck it from his finger for the wealth That the world masters. Now in faith, Gratiano, You give your wife too unkind a cause of grief.","I gave my lover a ring and made him swear never to lose it or give it away. And here he is. I’d swear he wouldn’t leave it behind, or even take it off his finger, for all the money in the world. To tell the truth, Gratiano, you’re giving your wife a valid reason to get upset. If it were me, I’d be very upset too."
"(aside) Why, I were best to cut my left hand off And swear I lost the ring defending it.",(to himself) Maybe I should cut off my left hand and swear I lost the ring defending it.
"My Lord Bassanio gave his ring away Unto the judge that begged it and indeed That took some pains in writing, he begged mine. And neither man nor master would take aught But the two rings.","Bassanio gave his ring to the judge who asked for it, and deserved it too. And then his clerk, who went to a lot of trouble with the writing, begged for mine. Neither of them would take anything but the two rings."
"What ring gave you my lord? Not that, I hope, which you received of me.","Which ring did you give away, my lord? Not the one I gave you, I hope."
I would deny it. but you see my finger Hath not the ring upon it. It is gone.,"If I could make things better by lying, I’d deny it. But you see my finger doesn’t have the ring on it. It’s gone."
"Even so void is your false heart of truth. By heaven, I will ne'er come in your bed","Just as there’s no ring on your finger, there’s no truth in your heart. I swear I’ll never get into your bed until I see the ring again!"
(to GRATIANO) Nor I in yours Till I again see mine.,"(to GRATIANO) Me neither, until I see mine again!"
"Sweet Portia, If you did know to whom I gave the ring, If you did know for whom I gave the ring, And how unwillingly I left the ring When naught would be accepted but the ring, You would abate the strength of your displeasure.","My dear Portia, if you knew who I gave the ring to, for whose sake I gave the ring to him, why I gave it to him, and how unwilling I was to leave it when he wouldn’t accept anything but the ring, you wouldn’t be so angry."
"If you had known the virtue of the ring, Or your own honor to contain the ring, You would not then have parted with the ring. What man is there so much unreasonable, If you had pleased to have defended it To urge the thing held as a ceremony? Nerissa teaches me what to believe. I’ll die for ’t but some woman had the ring.","If you’d known how much that ring meant, how much the woman who gave it to you is worth, or how much your honor depended on your keeping the ring, you wouldn’t have let it go. Who would be so unreasonable as to insist on taking the ring if you’d defended it with any kind of zeal? Who would have had so little self-restraint that they’d insist on getting a ring with ceremonial value? Nerissa’s got the right idea. I’ll bet my life you gave some woman the ring!"
"No, by my honor, madam, by my soul, Which did refuse three thousand ducats of me And begged the ring, the which I did deny him And suffered him to go displeased away— Even he that did uphold the very life I was enforced to send it after him. I was beset with shame and courtesy. My honor would not let ingratitude So much besmear it. Pardon me, good lady, Had you been there I think you would have begged The ring of me to give the worthy doctor.","No, I swear, madam. No woman got it from me, but an expert in civil law who refused three thousand ducats but asked instead for the ring, which I denied him. I watched him leave looking discontented, even though he had saved the life of my good friend. What could I say, my dear? I had to send it to him. I was ashamed and wanted to show my good manners. I just couldn’t dishonor myself by acting ungrateful to him. Please forgive me, good lady. If you’d been there, I think you would have begged me to give him the ring."
"Let not that doctor e'er come near my house! Since he hath got the jewel that I loved, I will become as liberal as you. I’ll not deny him anything I have, No, not my body, nor my husband’s bed. Know him I shall, I am well sure of it. If you do not, if I be left alone, Now, by mine honor—which is yet mine own— I’ll have that doctor for my bedfellow.","Don’t let that lawyer ever come near my house! Since he has the jewel I loved, which you swore you’d keep forever, I’ll be as generous as you were to him. I won’t deny him anything of mine, including my own body and my husband’s bed. I’ll recognize him all right, I’m sure of it. So don’t spend one night away from this house. Watch me like a hawk. If you don’t, if I’m left alone, I swear I’ll have that legal expert as my bedfellow."
(to GRATIANO) And I his clerk. Therefore be well advised,(to GRATIANO) And I’ll have his clerk as mine. So be careful when you leave me to my own devices.
"Well, do you so, let not me take him then. For if I do I’ll mar the young clerk’s pen.","Well, go ahead. But don’t let me catch him, because if I do I’ll break that clerk’s pen."
I am th' unhappy subject of these quarrels.,All these quarrels are about me.
"Sir, grieve not you. You are welcome notwithstanding.",Don’t be upset. You’re welcome in our home in spite of everything that’s going on.
"And in the hearing of these many friends I swear to thee, even by thine own fair eyes Wherein I see myself—","Portia, forgive me for this mistake that I had to make. All these friends are my witnesses, so I swear to you, I swear by your beautiful eyes, in which I see myself reflected—"
Mark you but that! In both my eyes he doubly sees himself— And there’s an oath of credit!,"Did you hear that! He sees himself in my two eyes, so there’s two of him. He should swear by his two-faced self, and that’s an oath I’ll believe!"
"Nay, but hear me. Pardon this fault, and by my soul I swear I never more will break an oath with thee.","No, just listen to me. If you forgive my mistake, I swear I’ll never break an oath with you again."
"I once did lend my body for his wealth, Had quite miscarried. I dare be bound again, My soul upon the forfeit, that your lord Will never more break faith advisedly.","I lent my body once to make him rich. If it hadn’t been for the gentleman who now owns your husband’s ring, my body would’ve been lost. I’d be the guarantee again, promising my soul this time as penalty, if your husband ever breaks a vow again knowingly."
(giving ANTONIO a ring) And bid him keep it better than the other.,(she gives ANTONIO a ring) Then you’ll be my guarantee. Give him this. And tell him to hold on to it better than the other one.
"(giving BASSANIO PORTIA's ring) Here, Lord Bassanio. Swear to keep this ring.","(he gives BASSANIO PORTIA’s ring) Here, Bassanio, swear that you’ll keep this ring."
"By heaven, it is the same I gave the doctor!","My God, it’s the same one I gave the judge!"
"For by this ring, the doctor lay with me.","I got it from him. I’m sorry, Bassanio, but the legal expert slept with me in exchange for this ring."
"(taking out a ring) And pardon me, my gentle Gratiano, For that same scrubbèd boy, the doctor’s clerk,","(she takes out a ring) And I’m sorry too, Gratiano, but that stunted lawyer’s clerk slept with me last night in exchange for this ring."
"Why, this is like the mending of highways In summer where the ways are fair enough! What, are we cuckolds ere we have deserved it?","This is like fixing roads in the summer when they don’t need to be fixed! What, did you cheat on us before we deserved it?"
"Speak not so grossly.—You are all amazed. Here is a letter. Read it at your leisure. It comes from Padua, from Bellario. There you shall find that Portia was the doctor, Nerissa there her clerk. Lorenzo here And even but now returned. I have not yet Entered my house.—Antonio, you are welcome. And I have better news in store for you Than you expect. Unseal this letter soon. There you shall find three of your argosies Are richly come to harbor suddenly. You shall not know by what strange accident I chancèd on this letter.","Don’t be crass.—You all look confused. (she takes out a letter) Here’s a letter. Read it at your leisure. It comes from Padua, from Bellario. You’ll find out that Portia was the lawyer, and Nerissa was her clerk. Lorenzo here will testify that I left the house right when you did, and just returned. I haven’t yet entered my house.—Antonio, welcome. I have better news than you expect in store for you. (she gives ANTONIO another letter) Open this letter. You’ll find out that three of your ships have suddenly arrived in the harbor loaded with a great deal of wealth. You’ll never guess what a strange coincidence it was that I came across this letter."
I am dumb.,I’m speechless.
(to PORTIA) Were you the doctor and I knew you not?,"(to PORTIA) You were the doctor, and I didn’t even recognize you?"
(to NERISSA) Were you the clerk that is to make me cuckold?,(to NERISSA) Were you the clerk with whom my wife’s going to cheat on me?
"Ay, but the clerk that never means to do it","Yes, but the clerk will never do it, unless he grows up to be a man."
"(to PORTIA) Sweet doctor, you shall be my bedfellow. When I am absent then lie with my wife.","(to PORTIA) My sweet lawyer, you’ll be my bedfellow. When I’m not there, you can sleep with my wife."
"Sweet lady, you have given me life and living. For here I read for certain that my ships","Madam, you’ve given me life and given me a living too. I’ve read in this letter that my ships have safely come to harbor."
"How now, Lorenzo? My clerk hath some good comforts too for you.","How are you, Lorenzo? My clerk has some comforting news for you, too."
"Ay, and I’ll give them him without a fee. (gives LORENZO a document) From the rich Jew, a special deed of gift, After his death of all he dies possessed of.","Yes, and I’ll give it to him for free. (she gives LORENZO a document) This is from the rich Jew, for you and Jessica. It’s a special testament. After he dies, you’ll inherit everything he owns."
"Fair ladies, you drop manna in the way Of starvèd people.","Ladies, you’re dropping bread from the heavens to starving people."
"It is almost morning, Of these events at full. Let us go in, And charge us there upon interr'gatories, And we will answer all things faithfully.","It’s almost morning, but I’m sure you’re not fully satisfied about what happened. Let’s go inside and we’ll answer all your questions truthfully."
"Let it be so. The first interr'gatory Whether till the next night she had rather stay, Or go to bed now, being two hours to day. But were the day come, I should wish it dark, That I were couching with the doctor’s clerk. So sore as keeping safe Nerissa’s ring.","All right, then. My first question for Nerissa is whether she’d rather wait till tomorrow night or go to bed now, since there are only two more hours till morning. When the day comes, I’ll wish it were nighttime, so I could sleep with the legal expert’s clerk. In any case, I won’t worry about anything for the rest of my life more than keeping Nerissa’s ring safe."
