"Now, fair Hippolyta, our nuptial hour Draws on apace. Four happy days bring in Another moon. But oh, methinks how slow This old moon wanes! She lingers my desires, Long withering out a young man’s revenue.","Our wedding day is almost here, my beautiful Hippolyta. We’ll be getting married in four days, on the day of the new moon. But it seems to me that the days are passing too slowly—the old moon is taking too long to fade away! That old, slow moon is keeping me from getting what I want, just like an old widow makes her stepson wait to get his inheritance."
"Four days will quickly steep themselves in night. Four nights will quickly dream away the time. And then the moon, like to a silver bow Of our solemnities.","No, you’ll see, four days will quickly turn into four nights. And since we dream at night, time passes quickly then. Finally the new moon, curved like a silver bow in the sky, will look down on our wedding celebration."
"Go, Philostrate, Stir up the Athenian youth to merriments. Awake the pert and nimble spirit of mirth. Turn melancholy forth to funerals.","Go, Philostrate, get the young people of Athens ready to celebrate and have a good time. Sadness is only appropriate for funerals. We don’t want it at our festivities."
"Hippolyta, I wooed thee with my sword And won thy love doing thee injuries. But I will wed thee in another key, With pomp, with triumph, and with reveling.","Hippolyta, I wooed you with violence, using my sword, and got you to fall in love with me by injuring you. But I’ll marry you under different circumstances—with extravagant festivals, public festivities, and celebration."
"Happy be Theseus, our renownèd duke.","Long live Theseus, our famous and respected duke!"
"Thanks, good Egeus. What’s the news with thee?","Thanks, good Egeus. What’s new with you?"
"Full of vexation come I with complaint Against my child, my daughter Hermia.— Stand forth, Demetrius.—My noble lord, Stand forth, Lysander.—And my gracious duke, This man hath bewitched the bosom of my child.— Thou, thou, Lysander, thou hast given her rhymes, And interchanged love tokens with my child. With feigning voice verses of feigning love, And stol'n the impression of her fantasy With bracelets of thy hair, rings, gauds, conceits, Knacks, trifles, nosegays, sweetmeats—messengers With cunning hast thou filched my daughter’s heart, Turned her obedience (which is due to me) To stubborn harshness.—And, my gracious duke, Be it so she will not here before your grace I beg the ancient privilege of Athens. As she is mine, I may dispose of her— Which shall be either to this gentleman Or to her death—according to our law","I’m here, full of anger, to complain about my daughter Hermia.—Step forward, Demetrius.—My lord, this man, Demetrius, has my permission to marry her.—Step forward, Lysander.—But this other man, Lysander, has cast a magic spell over my child’s heart.—You, you, Lysander, you’ve given her poems, and exchanged tokens of love with my daughter. You’ve pretended to be in love with her, singing fake love songs softly at her window by moonlight, and you’ve captured her imagination by giving her locks of your hair, rings, toys, trinkets, knickknacks, little presents, flowers, and candies—things that can really influence an impressionable young person. You’ve connived to steal my daughter’s heart, making her stubborn and harsh instead of obedient (like she should be).—And, my gracious duke, if she won’t agree to marry Demetrius right now, I ask you to let me exercise the right that all fathers have in Athens. Since she belongs to me, I can do what I want with her—as the law says: I can either make her marry Demetrius—or have her killed."
"What say you, Hermia? Be advised, fair maid: To you your father should be as a god, One that composed your beauties, yea, and one To whom you are but as a form in wax, To leave the figure or disfigure it. Demetrius is a worthy gentleman.","What do you have to say for yourself, Hermia? Think carefully, pretty girl. You should think of your father as a god, since he’s the one who gave you your beauty. To him, you’re like a figure that he’s sculpted out of wax, and he has the power to keep that figure intact or to disfigure it. Demetrius is an admirable man."
So is Lysander.,So is Lysander.
"In himself he is. But in this kind, wanting your father’s voice,","You’re right, Lysander’s admirable too. But since your father doesn’t want him to marry you, you have to consider Demetrius to be the better man."
I would my father looked but with my eyes.,I wish my father could see them with my eyes.
Rather your eyes must with his judgment look.,"No, you must see them as your father sees them."
"I do entreat your grace to pardon me. I know not by what power I am made bold In such a presence here to plead my thoughts, But I beseech your grace that I may know The worst that may befall me in this case, If I refuse to wed Demetrius.","Your grace, please forgive me. I don’t know what makes me think I can say this, and I don’t know if speaking my mind to such a powerful and noble person as yourself will damage my reputation for modesty. But please, tell me the worst thing that could happen to me if I refuse to marry Demetrius."
"Forever the society of men. Therefore, fair Hermia, question your desires. Know of your youth. Examine well your blood— Whether, if you yield not to your father’s choice, For aye to be in shady cloister mewed, To live a barren sister all your life, Chanting faint hymns to the cold, fruitless moon. Thrice-blessèd they that master so their blood But earthlier happy is the rose distilled Than that which, withering on the virgin thorn, Grows, lives, and dies in single blessedness.","You’ll either be executed or you’ll never see another man again. So think carefully about what you want, beautiful Hermia. Consider how young you are, and question your feelings. Then decide whether you could stand to be a nun, wearing a priestess’s habit and caged up in a cloister forever, living your entire life without a husband or children, weakly chanting hymns to the cold and virginal goddess of the moon. People who can restrain their passions and stay virgins forever are holy. But although a virgin priestess might be rewarded in heaven, a married woman is happier on Earth. A married woman is like a rose who is picked and made into a beautiful perfume, while a priestess just withers away on the stem."
"So will I grow, so live, so die, my lord, Unto his lordship, whose unwishèd yoke My soul consents not to give sovereignty.",I’d rather wither away than give up my virginity to someone I don’t love.
"Take time to pause, and by the next new moon— The sealing day betwixt my love and me Upon that day either prepare to die For disobedience to your father’s will, Or else to wed Demetrius, as he would, Or on Diana’s altar to protest","Take some time to think about this. By the time of the next new moon—the day when Hippolyta and I will be married—be ready either to be executed for disobeying your father, to marry Demetrius as your father wishes, or to take a vow to spend the rest of your life as a virgin priestess of the moon goddess."
"Relent, sweet Hermia—And, Lysander, yield Thy crazèd title to my certain right.","Please give in, sweet Hermia.—And Lysander, stop acting like she’s yours. I’ve got more of a right to her than you do."
"You have her father’s love, Demetrius. Let me have Hermia’s. Do you marry him.","Her father loves you, Demetrius. So why don’t you marry him and let me have Hermia?"
"And what is mine my love shall render him. And she is mine, and all my right of her I do estate unto Demetrius.","It’s true, rude Lysander, I do love him. That’s why I’m giving him my daughter. She’s mine, and I’m giving her to Demetrius."
"(to THESEUS) I am, my lord, as well derived as he, My fortunes every way as fairly ranked, (If not with vantage) as Demetrius'. And—which is more than all these boasts can be— I am beloved of beauteous Hermia. Demetrius, I’ll avouch it to his head, Made love to Nedar’s daughter, Helena, And won her soul. And she, sweet lady, dotes, Devoutly dotes, dotes in idolatry","(to THESEUS) My lord, I’m just as noble and rich as he is. I love Hermia more than he does. My prospects are as good as his, if not better. And beautiful Hermia loves me—which is more important than all those other things I’m bragging about. Why shouldn’t I be able to marry her? Demetrius—and I’ll say this to his face—courted Nedar’s daughter, Helena, and made her fall in love with him. That sweet lady, Helena, loves devoutly. She adores this horrible and unfaithful man."
"I must confess that I have heard so much And with Demetrius thought to have spoke thereof, But being overfull of self-affairs, My mind did lose it.—But, Demetrius, come. I have some private schooling for you both.— For you, fair Hermia, look you arm yourself To fit your fancies to your father’s will, Or else the law of Athens yields you up To death, or to a vow of single life.— Come, my Hippolyta. What cheer, my love?— Demetrius and Egeus, go along. I must employ you in some business Of something nearly that concerns yourselves.","I have to admit I’ve heard something about that, and meant to ask Demetrius about it, but I was too busy with personal matters and it slipped my mind.—Anyway, Demetrius and Egeus, both of you, come with me. I want to say a few things to you in private.—As for you, beautiful Hermia, get ready to do what your father wants, because otherwise the law says that you must die or become a nun, and there’s nothing I can do about that.—Come with me, Hippolyta. How are you, my love?—Demetrius and Egeus, come with us. I want you to do some things for our wedding, and I also want to discuss something that concerns you both."
With duty and desire we follow you.,"We’re following you not only because it is our duty, but also because we want to."
"How now, my love? Why is your cheek so pale? How chance the roses there do fade so fast?","What’s going on, my love? Why are you so pale? Why have your rosy cheeks faded so quickly?"
Beteem them from the tempest of my eyes.,"Probably because my cheeks' roses needed rain, which I could easily give them with all the tears in my eyes."
"Ay me! For aught that I could ever read, Could ever hear by tale or history, The course of true love never did run smooth.","Oh, honey! Listen, in books they say that true love always faces obstacles. Either the lovers have different social standings—"
O cross! Too high to be enthralled to low.,"Oh, what an obstacle that would be! Imagine being too high on the social ladder, and falling in love with someone beneath you."
Or else misgraffèd in respect of years—,Or else they were very different ages—
O spite! Too old to be engaged to young.,How awful! Being too old to marry someone young.
Or else it stood upon the choice of friends—,Or else their guardians and advisors said no—
"O hell, to choose love by another’s eyes!","What hell, to have your love life determined by someone else!"
"Or, if there were a sympathy in choice, War, death, or sickness did lay siege to it, Making it momentary as a sound, Swift as a shadow, short as any dream, That, in a spleen, unfolds both heaven and Earth, And ere a man hath power to say “Behold!” The jaws of darkness do devour it up. So quick bright things come to confusion.","Or, even if the lovers are a good match, their love might be ruined by war, death, or sickness, so that the affair only lasts an instant. Their time together might be as fleeting as a shadow or as short as a dream, lasting only as long as it takes a lightning bolt to flash across the sky. Before you can say “look,” it’s gone. That’s how intense things like love are quickly destroyed."
"It stands as an edict in destiny. Then let us teach our trial patience, Because it is a customary cross, As due to love as thoughts and dreams and sighs,","If true lovers are always thwarted, then it must be a rule of fate. So let’s try to be patient as we deal with our problem. It’s as normal a part of love as dreams, sighs, wishes, and tears."
"A good persuasion. Therefore, hear me, Hermia. I have a widow aunt, a dowager Of great revenue, and she hath no child. From Athens is her house remote seven leagues, There, gentle Hermia, may I marry thee. And to that place the sharp Athenian law Cannot pursue us. If thou lovest me then, Steal forth thy father’s house tomorrow night.","That’s the right attitude. So, listen, Hermia. I have an aunt who is a widow, who’s very rich and doesn’t have any children. She lives about twenty miles from Athens, and she thinks of me as a son. I could marry you there, gentle Hermia, where the strict laws of Athens can’t touch us. So here’s the plan. If you love me, sneak out of your father’s house tomorrow night and meet me in the forest a few miles outside of town."
Where I did meet thee once with Helena To do observance to a morn of May— There will I stay for thee.,You remember the place—I met you there once with Helena to celebrate May Day.—I’ll wait for you there.
"My good Lysander! I swear to thee by Cupid’s strongest bow, By the simplicity of Venus' doves, By that which knitteth souls and prospers loves, And by that fire which burned the Carthage queen When the false Troyan under sail was seen, (In number more than ever women spoke), In that same place thou hast appointed me, Tomorrow truly will I meet with thee.","Oh, Lysander, I swear I’ll be there tomorrow. I swear by Cupid’s strongest bow and his best gold-tipped arrow, by the Goddess of Love’s innocent doves, by everything that ties lovers together, by the bonfire where Queen Dido burned herself to death when her lover Aeneas jilted her, and by all the promises that men have broken (and men have broken more promises than women have ever made). I give you my word, I will meet you at that spot tomorrow."
"Keep promise, love. Look, here comes Helena.","Keep your promise, my love. Look, here comes Helena."
"Godspeed, fair Helena! Whither away?","Hello, beautiful Helena! Where are you going?"
"Call you me “fair”? That “fair” again unsay. Demetrius loves your fair. O happy fair! Your eyes are lodestars, and your tongue’s sweet air More tunable than lark to shepherd’s ear Sickness is catching. Oh, were favor so, Yours would I catch, fair Hermia, ere I go. My ear should catch your voice. My eye, your eye. My tongue should catch your tongue’s sweet melody. The rest I’d give to be to you translated.","Did you just call me “beautiful”? Take it back. You’re the beautiful one as far as Demetrius is concerned. Oh, you’re so lucky! Your eyes are like stars, and your voice is more musical than a lark’s song is to a shepherd in the springtime. Sickness is contagious—I wish beauty were contagious too! I would catch your good looks before I left. My ear would be infected by your voice, my eye by your eye, and my tongue would come down with a bad case of your melodious speech. If the world were mine, I’d give it all up—everything except Demetrius—to be you."
"O, teach me how you look and with what art You sway the motion of Demetrius' heart.","Oh, teach me how you look the way you do, and which tricks you used to make Demetrius fall in love with you."
"I frown upon him, yet he loves me still.","I frown at him, but he still loves me."
"Oh, that your frowns would teach my smiles such skill!","Oh, if only my smiles could inspire love as effectively as your frowns!"
"I give him curses, yet he gives me love.","I curse him, but he loves me."
"Oh, that my prayers could such affection move!",If only my prayers could inspire that kind of affection!
"The more I hate, the more he follows me.","The more I hate him, the more he follows me around."
"The more I love, the more he hateth me.","The more I love him, the more he hates me."
"His folly, Helena, is no fault of mine.","It’s not my fault he acts like that, Helena."
"None, but your beauty. Would that fault were mine!","That’s true, it’s your beauty’s fault. I wish I had a fault like that!"
"Take comfort. He no more shall see my face. Lysander and myself will fly this place. Before the time I did Lysander see Oh, then, what graces in my love do dwell, That he hath turned a heaven unto a hell!","Don’t worry. He won’t see my face ever again. Lysander and I are running away from here. Before I saw Lysander, Athens seemed like paradise to me. But Lysander’s so attractive that he’s turned heaven into hell!"
"Helen, to you our minds we will unfold. Tomorrow night when Phoebe doth behold Decking with liquid pearl the bladed grass (A time that lovers' flights doth still conceal), Through Athens' gates have we devised to steal.","Helena, we’ll tell you about our secret plan. Tomorrow night, when the moon shines on the water and decorates the grass with tiny beads of pearly light (the time of night that always hides runaway lovers), we plan to sneak out of Athens."
"(to HELENA) And in the wood where often you and I Emptying our bosoms of their counsel sweet,","(to HELENA) In the woods where you and I used to lounge around on the pale primroses, telling each other sweet secrets—that’s where Lysander and I will meet."
"There my Lysander and myself shall meet. And thence from Athens turn away our eyes To seek new friends and stranger companies. And good luck grant thee thy Demetrius!— Keep word, Lysander. We must starve our sight From lovers' food till morrow deep midnight.","From then on we’ll turn our backs on Athens. We’ll look for new friends and keep the company of strangers. Goodbye, old friend. Pray for us, and I hope you win over Demetrius!—Keep your promise, Lysander. We need to stay away from each other until midnight tomorrow."
"I will, my Hermia.","I will, my Hermia."
"Helena, adieu.","Goodbye, Helena. I hope Demetrius comes to love you as much as you love him!"
"How happy some o'er other some can be! Through Athens I am thought as fair as she. But what of that? Demetrius thinks not so. He will not know what all but he do know. So I, admiring of his qualities. Things base and vile, holding no quantity, Love can transpose to form and dignity. Love looks not with the eyes but with the mind. Nor hath Love’s mind of any judgment taste— Wings and no eyes figure unheedy haste. And therefore is Love said to be a child, Because in choice he is so oft beguiled. So the boy Love is perjured everywhere. For ere Demetrius looked on Hermia’s eyne, He hailed down oaths that he was only mine.","It’s amazing how much happier some people are than others! People throughout Athens think I’m as beautiful as Hermia. But so what? Demetrius doesn’t think so, and that’s all that matters. He refuses to admit what everyone else knows. But even though he’s making a mistake by obsessing over Hermia so much, I’m also making a mistake, since I obsess over him. Love can make worthless things beautiful. When we’re in love, we don’t see with our eyes but with our minds. That’s why paintings of Cupid, the god of love, always show him as blind. And love doesn’t have good judgment either—Cupid, has wings and no eyes, so he’s bound to be reckless and hasty. That’s why they say love is a child. because it makes such bad choices. Just as boys like to play games by telling lies, Cupid breaks his promises all the time. Before Demetrius ever saw Hermia, he showered me with promises and swore he’d be mine forever."
"And when this hail some heat from Hermia felt, I will go tell him of fair Hermia’s flight. Then to the wood will he tomorrow night Pursue her. And for this intelligence If I have thanks, it is a dear expense. To have his sight thither and back again.","But when he got all hot and bothered over Hermia, his promises melted away. I’ll go tell Demetrius that Hermia is running away tomorrow night. He’ll run after her. If he’s grateful to me for this information, it’ll be worth my pain in helping him pursue my rival Hermia. At least I’ll get to see him when he goes, and then again when he comes back."
Is all our company here?,Is everyone here?
"You were best to call them generally, man by man, according to the scrip.","You should call their names generally, Bottom means “individually,” not “generally. Bottom frequently makes mistakes with words. generally, one person at a time, in the order in which their names appear on this piece of paper."
"Here is the scroll of every man’s name which is thought fit, through all Athens, to play in our interlude before the duke and the duchess, on his wedding day at night.",This is a list of the names of all the men in Athens who are good enough to act in the play we’re going to perform for the duke and duchess on their wedding night.
"First, good Peter Quince, say what the play treats on, then read the names of the actors, and so grow to a point.","First, Peter Quince, tell us what the play is about, then read the names of the actors, and then shut up."
"Marry, our play is The most lamentable comedy and most cruel death of Pyramus and Thisbe.",All right. Our play is called A Very Tragic Comedy About the Horrible Deaths of Pyramus and Thisbe.
"A very good piece of work, I assure you, and a merry.—Now, good Peter Quince, call forth your actors by the scroll.—Masters, spread yourselves.","Let me tell you, it’s a great piece of work, and very—funny.—Now, Peter Quince, call the names of the actors on the list. Men, gather around him."
"Answer as I call you.—Nick Bottom, the weaver?","Answer when I call your name.—Nick Bottom, the weaver?"
Ready. Name what part I am for and proceed.,"Here. Tell me which part I’m going to play, then go on."
"You, Nick Bottom, are set down for Pyramus.","You, Nick Bottom, have been cast as Pyramus."
"What is Pyramus? A lover or a tyrant? Medieval and Renaissance plays often featured tyrant characters—kings who gave long, ranting speeches. tyrant?",What’s Pyramus? A lover or a tyrant?
"A lover that kills himself, most gallant, for love.",A lover who kills himself very nobly for love.
"That will ask some tears in the true performing of it. If I do it, let the audience look to their eyes. I will move storms. I will condole in some measure.—To the rest.—Yet my chief humor is for a tyrant. I could play Ercles rarely, or a part to tear a cat in to make all split. The raging rocks And shivering shocks Shall break the locks Of prison gates. And Phoebus' car Shall shine from far And make and mar The foolish Fates. This was lofty!—Now name the rest of the players.—This is Ercles' vein, a tyrant’s vein. A lover is more condoling.","I’ll have to cry to make my performance believable. And as soon as I start crying, oh boy, the audience had better watch out, because they’ll start crying too. I’ll make tears pour out of their eyes like rainstorms. I’ll moan very believably.—Name the other actors.—But I’m really in the mood to play a tyrant. I could do a great job with Hercules, or any other part that requires ranting and raving. I would rant and rave really well. Like this, listen. The raging rocks nd shivering shocks Will break the locks Of prison gates. And the sun-god’s car Will shine from far Away, and make and mar Foolish fate. Oh, that was truly inspired!—Now tell us who the other actors are.—By the way, my performance just now was in the style of Hercules, the tyrant style. A lover would have to be weepier, of course."
"Francis Flute, the bellows-mender?","Francis Flute, the bellows-repairman?"
"Here, Peter Quince.","Here, Peter Quince."
"Flute, you must take Thisbe on you.","Flute, you’ll be playing the role of Thisbe."
What is Thisbe? A wandering knight?,Who’s Thisbe? A knight on a quest?
It is the lady that Pyramus must love.,Thisbe is the lady Pyramus is in love with.
"Nay, faith, let me not play a woman. I have a beard coming.","No, come on, don’t make me play a woman. I’m growing a beard."
"That’s all one. You shall play it in a mask, and you may speak as small as you will.","That doesn’t matter. You’ll wear a mask, and you can make your voice as high as you want to."
"An I may hide my face, let me play Thisbe too! I’ll speak in a monstrous little voice: “Thisne, Thisne!”—“Ah, Pyramus, my lover dear, thy Thisbe dear and lady dear!”","In that case, if I can wear a mask, let me play Thisbe too! I’ll be Pyramus first: “Thisne, Thisne!”—And then in falsetto: “Ah, Pyramus, my dear lover! I’m your dear Thisbe, your dear lady!”"
"No, no. You must play Pyramus.—And Flute, you Thisbe.","No, no. Bottom, you’re Pyramus.—And Flute, you’re Thisbe."
"Well, proceed.",All right. Go on.
"Robin Starveling, the tailor?","Robin Starveling, the tailor?"
"Here, Peter Quince.","Here, Peter Quince."
"Robin Starveling, you must play Thisbe’s mother.—Tom Snout, the tinker?","Robin Starveling, you’re going to play Thisbe’s mother.—Tom Snout, the handyman."
"Here, Peter Quince.","Here, Peter Quince."
"You, Pyramus' father.—Myself, Thisbe’s father.—Snug the joiner, you, the lion’s part.—And I hope here is a play fitted.","You’ll be Pyramus’s father—I’ll play Thisbe’s father myself—Snug, the cabinetmaker, you’ll play the part of the lion.—So that’s everyone. I hope this play is well cast now."
"Have you the lion’s part written? Pray you, if it be, give it me, for I am slow of study.","Do you have the lion’s part written down? If you do, please give it to me, because I need to start learning the lines. It takes me a long time to learn things."
"You may do it extempore, for it is nothing but roaring.",You can improvise the whole thing. It’s just roaring.
"Let me play the lion too. I will roar, that I will do any man’s heart good to hear me. I will roar, that I will make the duke say, “Let him roar again. Let him roar again.”","Let me play the lion too. I’ll roar so well that it’ll be an inspiration to anyone who hears me. I’ll roar so well that the duke will say, “Let him roar again. Let him roar again.”"
"An you should do it too terribly, you would fright the duchess and the ladies, that they would shriek. And that were enough to hang us all.","If you roar too ferociously, you’ll scare the duchess and the other ladies and make them scream. And that would get us all executed."
"That would hang us, every mother’s son.","Yeah, that would get every single one of us executed."
"I grant you, friends, if you should fright the ladies out of their wits, they would have no more discretion but to hang us. But I will aggravate my voice so that I will roar you as gently as any sucking dove. I will roar you an ’twere any nightingale.","Well, my friends, you’ve got to admit that if you scare the living daylights out of the ladies, they’d have no choice but to execute us. But I’ll soften my voice—you know, aggravate “Aggravate” is a mistake for “moderate.” aggravate it, so to speak—so that I’ll roar as gently as a baby dove. I’ll roar like a sweet, peaceful nightingale."
"You can play no part but Pyramus. For Pyramus is a sweet-faced man, a proper man as one shall see in a summer’s day, a most lovely, gentlemanlike man. Therefore you must needs play Pyramus.","You can’t play any part except Pyramus. Because Pyramus is a good-looking man, the most handsome man that you could find on a summer’s day, a lovely gentlemanly man. So you’re the only one who could play Pyramus."
"Well, I will undertake it. What beard were I best to play it in?","Well then, I’ll do it. What kind of beard should I wear for the part?"
"Why, what you will.","Whatever kind you want, I guess."
"I will discharge it in either your straw-color beard, your orange-tawny beard, your purple-in-grain beard, or your French crown-color beard, your perfect yellow.","I’ll play the part wearing either a straw-colored beard, or a sandy beard, or a red beard, or one of those bright yellow beards that’s the color of a French coin."
"Some of your French crowns have no hair at all, and then you will play barefaced.—But masters, here are your parts. And I am to entreat you, request you, and desire you to con them by tomorrow night and meet me in the palace wood, a mile without the town, by moonlight. There will we rehearse, for if we meet in the city we shall be dogged with company, and our devices known. In the meantime I will draw a bill of properties such as our play wants. I pray you, fail me not.","Some French people don’t have beards at all, because syphilis has made all their hair fall out, so you might have to play the part clean-shaven.—But gentlemen, here are your scripts, and I beg you to please learn them by tomorrow night. Meet me in the duke’s forest a mile outside of town. It’s best to rehearse there, because if we do it here in the city, we’ll be bothered by crowds of people and everyone will know the plot of our play. Meanwhile, I’ll make a list of props that we’ll need for the play. Now make sure you show up, all of you. Don’t leave me in the lurch."
"We will meet, and there we may rehearse most obscenely and courageously. Take pains. Be perfect. Adieu.","We’ll be there, and there we’ll rehearse courageously and wonderfully, truly obscenely. Work hard, know your lines. Goodbye."
At the duke’s oak we meet.,We’ll meet at the giant oak tree in the duke’s forest.
"Enough. Hold, or cut bowstrings.","Got it? Be there, or don’t show your face again."
"How now, spirit? Whither wander you?","Hello, spirit! Where are you going?"
"Over hill, over dale, Thorough bush, thorough brier, Over park, over pale, Thorough flood, thorough fire. I do wander everywhere Swifter than the moon’s sphere. And I serve the fairy queen To dew her orbs upon the green. The cowslips tall her pensioners be. In their gold coats spots you see. Those be rubies, fairy favors. In those freckles live their savors. I must go seek some dewdrops here And hang a pearl in every cowslip’s ear. Farewell, thou lob of spirits. I’ll be gone. Our queen and all our elves come here anon.","I go over hills and valleys, through bushes and thorns, over parks and fenced-in spaces, through water and fire. I wander everywhere faster than the moon revolves around the Earth. I work for Titania, the Fairy Queen, and organize fairy dances for her in the grass. The cowslip flowers are her bodyguards. You’ll see that their petals have spots on them—those are rubies, fairy gifts. Their sweet smells come from those little freckles. Now I have to go find some dewdrops and hang a pearl earring on every cowslip flower. Goodbye, you dumb old spirit. I’ve got to go. The queen and her elves will be here soon."
"The king doth keep his revels here tonight. For Oberon is passing fell and wrath Because that she, as her attendant hath A lovely boy stolen from an Indian king. She never had so sweet a changeling. Knight of his train, to trace the forests wild. But she perforce withholds the lovèd boy, Crowns him with flowers, and makes him all her joy.","The king’s having a party here tonight. Just make sure the queen doesn’t come anywhere near him, because King Oberon is extremely angry. He’s furious because she stole an adorable boy from an Indian king. She’s never kidnapped such a darling human child before, and Oberon’s jealous. He wants the child for himself, to accompany him on his wanderings through the wild forests. But the queen refuses to hand the boy over to Oberon. Instead, she puts flowers in the boy’s hair and makes a fuss over him."
"And now they never meet in grove or green, But they do square, that all their elves for fear Creep into acorn cups and hide them there.","And now Oberon and Titania refuse to speak to each other, or meet each other anywhere—neither in the forest nor on the plain, nor by the river nor under the stars. They always argue, and the little fairies get so frightened that they hide in acorn cups and won’t come out."
"Either I mistake your shape and making quite, Or else you are that shrewd and knavish sprite That frights the maidens of the villagery, Skim milk, and sometimes labor in the quern And bootless make the breathless housewife churn, And sometime make the drink to bear no barm, Those that “Hobgoblin” call you, and “sweet Puck,” You do their work, and they shall have good luck. Are not you he?","Unless I’m mistaken, you’re that mischievous and naughty spirit named Robin Goodfellow. Aren’t you the one who goes around scaring the maidens in the village, stealing the cream from the top of the milk, screwing up the flour mills, and frustrating housewives by keeping their milk from turning into butter? Aren’t you the one who keeps beer from foaming up as it should, and causes people to get lost at night, while you laugh at them? Some people call you “Hobgoblin” and “sweet Puck,” and you’re nice to them. You do their work for them and give them good luck. That’s you, right?"
"Thou speak’st aright. I am that merry wanderer of the night. When I a fat and bean-fed horse beguile, Neighing in likeness of a filly foal. And sometime lurk I in a gossip’s bowl In very likeness of a roasted crab, And on her withered dewlap pour the ale. The wisest aunt telling the saddest tale Sometime for three-foot stool mistaketh me. Then slip I from her bum, down topples she, And then the whole quire hold their hips and laugh, And waxen in their mirth, and neeze, and swear A merrier hour was never wasted there. But, room, fairy! Here comes Oberon.","What you say is true. That’s me you’re talking about, the playful wanderer of the night. I tell jokes to Oberon and make him smile. I’ll trick a fat, well-fed horse into thinking that I’m a young female horse. Sometimes I hide at the bottom of an old woman’s drink disguised as an apple. When she takes a sip, I bob up against her lips and make her spill the drink all over her withered old neck. Sometimes a wise old woman with a sad story to tell tries to sit down on me, thinking I’m a three-legged stool. But I slip from underneath her and she falls down, crying, “Ow, my butt!” and starts coughing, and then everyone laughs and has fun. But step aside, fairy! Here comes Oberon."
And here my mistress. Would that he were gone!,"And here’s my mistress, Titania. I wish he’d go away!"
"Ill met by moonlight, proud Titania.","How not nice to see you, Titania."
"What, jealous Oberon?—Fairies, skip hence. I have forsworn his bed and company.","What, are you jealous, Oberon?—Fairies, let’s get out of here. I’ve sworn I’ll never sleep with him or talk to him again."
"Tarry, rash wanton. Am not I thy lord?","Wait just a minute, you brazen hussy. Aren’t you supposed to obey me, your lord and husband?"
"When thou hast stolen away from Fairyland, And in the shape of Corin sat all day, Playing on pipes of corn and versing love To amorous Phillida. Why art thou here, But that, forsooth, the bouncing Amazon, Your buskined mistress and your warrior love, To Theseus must be wedded, and you come To give their bed joy and prosperity.","If you’re my lord and husband, I must be your lady and wife, so you’re supposed to be faithful to me. But I know for a fact that you snuck away from Fairyland disguised as a shepherd, and spent all day playing straw pipes and singing love poems to your new girlfriend. The only reason you left India was to come here and see that butch Amazon Hippolyta. She was your boot-wearing mistress and your warrior lover, and now that she’s getting married to Theseus, you’ve come to celebrate their marriage."
"Knowing I know thy love to Theseus? Glance at my credit with Hippolyta, Didst thou not lead him through the glimmering night From Perigouna, whom he ravishèd? And make him with fair Ægles break his faith,","How can you stand there shamelessly talking about me and Hippolyta, when you know that I know about your love for Theseus? Weren’t you the one who made him desert Perigouna in the middle of the night, right after he’d raped her? And weren’t you the one who made him cheat on all of his other girlfriends, like Aegles, Ariadne, and Antiopa?"
"These are the forgeries of jealousy. And never, since the middle summer’s spring, Met we on hill, in dale, forest, or mead, By pavèd fountain, or by rushy brook, To dance our ringlets to the whistling wind, But with thy brawls thou hast disturbed our sport. Therefore the winds, piping to us in vain, As in revenge, have sucked up from the sea Have every pelting river made so proud That they have overborne their continents. The ox hath therefore stretched his yoke in vain, The ploughman lost his sweat, and the green corn The fold stands empty in the drownèd field, And crows are fatted with the murrain flock. The nine-men’s-morris is filled up with mud, And the quaint mazes in the wanton green The human mortals want their winter here. No night is now with hymn or carol blessed. Therefore the moon, the governess of floods, Pale in her anger, washes all the air, And thorough this distemperature we see The seasons alter: hoary-headed frosts Fall in the fresh lap of the crimson rose, And on old Hiems' thin and icy crown Is, as in mockery, set. The spring, the summer, The childing autumn, angry winter change Their wonted liveries, and the mazèd world, By their increase, now knows not which is which. From our debate, from our dissension. We are their parents and original.","These are nothing but jealous lies. Since the beginning of midsummer, my fairies and I haven’t been able to meet anywhere to do our dances in the wind without being disturbed by you and your arguments. We haven’t been able to meet on a hill or in a valley, in the forest or a meadow, by a pebbly fountain or a rushing stream, or on the beach by the ocean without you disturbing us. And because you interrupt us so that we can’t dance for them, the winds have made fogs rise up out of the sea and fall down on the rivers so that the rivers flood, just to get revenge on you. So all the work that oxen and farmers have done in plowing the fields has been for nothing, because the unripe grain has rotted before it was ripe. Sheep pens are empty in the middle of the flooded fields, and the crows get fat from eating the dead bodies of infected sheep. All the fields where people usually play games are filled with mud, and you can’t even see the elaborate mazes that people create in the grass, because no one walks in them anymore and they’ve all grown over. It’s not winter here for the human mortals, so they’re not protected by the holy hymns and carols that they sing in winter. So the pale, angry moon, who controls the tides, fills the air with diseases. As a consequence of this bad weather and these bad moods the seasons have started to change. Cold frosts spread over the red roses, and the icy winter wears a crown of sweet summer flowers as some sick joke. Spring, summer, fertile autumn and angry winter have all changed places, and now the confused world doesn’t know which is which. And this is all because of our argument. We are responsible for this."
Do you amend it then. It lies in you. Why should Titania cross her Oberon? To be my henchman.,"Do something about it, then. You have the power to fix it. Why would Titania want to argue with her Oberon? All I’m asking for is to have that little human boy as part of my crew."
"Set your heart at rest. The Fairyland buys not the child of me. His mother was a votaress of my order, And in the spicèd Indian air by night And sat with me on Neptune’s yellow sands, Marking th' embarkèd traders on the flood, When we have laughed to see the sails conceive And grow big-bellied with the wanton wind; Following—her womb then rich with my young squire— Would imitate, and sail upon the land To fetch me trifles and return again As from a voyage, rich with merchandise. And for her sake do I rear up her boy, And for her sake I will not part with him.","Get over it. I won’t give up this child for all of Fairyland. His mother was one of my worshippers, and we always used to gossip together at night in India, sitting together by the ocean and watching the merchant ships sailing on the ocean. We used to laugh to see the sails fill up with wind so that they looked like they had big, pregnant bellies, as if the wind had gotten them pregnant. She would imitate them—since she was already pregnant with the little boy—and she would go sailing over the land herself to go get me little presents, and come back carrying gifts like she was a ship coming back from a voyage. But since she was a mortal, she died giving birth to that boy, and for her sake I’m raising him and will not give him up."
How long within this wood intend you stay?,How long do you plan to stay here in this forest?
"Perchance till after Theseus' wedding day. And see our moonlight revels, go with us. If not, shun me, and I will spare your haunts.","Maybe until after Theseus’s wedding day. If you behave yourself and join us in our circle dance and moonlight celebrations, then you can come with us. If not, leave me alone, and I’ll stay away from your turf."
Give me that boy and I will go with thee.,Give me that boy and I’ll come with you.
"Not for thy fairy kingdom.—Fairies, away!","Not for your entire fairy kingdom.—Come, fairies, let’s go. We’re going to have an out-and-out brawl if I stay any longer."
"Well, go thy way. Thou shalt not from this grove Till I torment thee for this injury.—(to ROBIN GOODFELLOW) My gentle Puck, come hither. Thou rememberest Since once I sat upon a promontory Uttering such dulcet and harmonious breath That the rude sea grew civil at her song And certain stars shot madly from their spheres To hear the seamaid’s music?","Well, go on your way, then. You won’t leave this grove until I’ve paid you back for this insult. (to ROBIN GOODFELLOW) My dear Puck, come here. You remember the time when I was sitting on a cliff, and I heard a mermaid sitting on a dolphin’s back sing such a sweet and harmonious song that it calmed the stormy sea and made stars shoot out of the sky so they could hear her better?"
I remember.,"Yes, I remember."
"Flying between the cold moon and the Earth, Cupid all armed. A certain aim he took At a fair vestal thronèd by the west, And loosed his love shaft smartly from his bow But I might see young Cupid’s fiery shaft Quenched in the chaste beams of the watery moon, And the imperial votaress passèd on, In maiden meditation, fancy-free. It fell upon a little western flower, Before milk-white, now purple with love’s wound. And maidens call it “love-in-idleness.” Fetch me that flower. The herb I showed thee once. Will make or man or woman madly dote Upon the next live creature that it sees. Fetch me this herb, and be thou here again Ere the leviathan can swim a league.","That same night, I saw Cupid flying from the moon to the earth, with all of his arrows ready. (You couldn’t see him, but I could.) He took aim at a beautiful young virgin who was sitting on a throne in the western part of the world, and he shot his arrow of love well enough to have pierced a hundred thousand hearts. But I could see that Cupid’s fiery arrow was put out by watery, virginal moonbeams, so the royal virgin continued her virginal thoughts without being interrupted by thoughts of love. But I paid attention to where Cupid’s arrow fell. It fell on a little western flower, which used to be white as milk but now has turned purple from being wounded by the arrow of love. Young girls call it “love-in-idleness.” Bring me that flower. I showed it to you once. If its juice is put on someone’s eyelids while they’re asleep, that person will fall in love with the next living creature he or she sees. Bring me this plant, and get back here before the sea monster has time to swim three miles."
In forty minutes.,I could go around the world in forty minutes.
"Having once this juice, I’ll watch Titania when she is asleep And drop the liquor of it in her eyes. The next thing then she waking looks upon— On meddling monkey or on busy ape— She shall pursue it with the soul of love. And ere I take this charm from of her sight— As I can take it with another herb— But who comes here? I am invisible. And I will overhear their conference.","When I have the juice of that flower, I’ll trickle some drops of it on Titania’s eyes while she’s sleeping. She’ll fall madly in love with the first thing she sees when she wakes up—even if it’s a lion, a bear, a wolf, a bull, a monkey, or an ape. And before I make her normal again—I can cure her by treating her with another plant—I’ll make her give me that little boy as my page. But who’s that coming this way? I’ll make myself invisible and listen to their conversation."
"I love thee not, therefore pursue me not. Where is Lysander and fair Hermia? Thou told’st me they were stol'n unto this wood. And here am I, and wood within this wood, Because I cannot meet my Hermia. Hence, get thee gone, and follow me no more.","Look, I don’t love you, so stop following me around. Where are Lysander and beautiful Hermia? Lysander I want to stop, but Hermia stops my heart from beating. You told me they escaped into this forest. And here I am, going crazy in the middle of the woods because I can’t find my Hermia. Go away, get out of here, and stop following me."
"But yet you draw not iron, for my heart Is true as steel. Leave you your power to draw, And I shall have no power to follow you.","You attract me to you, you cruel magnet! But you must not attract iron, because my heart is as true as steel. If you let go of your power to attract me, I won’t have any power to follow you."
"Do I entice you? Do I speak you fair? Tell you I do not, nor I cannot, love you?",Do I ask you to follow me? Do I speak to you kindly? Don’t I tell you in the clearest terms that I do not and cannot love you?
"And even for that do I love you the more. I am your spaniel. And, Demetrius, The more you beat me, I will fawn on you. Neglect me, lose me. Only give me leave, Unworthy as I am, to follow you. What worser place can I beg in your love— And yet a place of high respect with me—","Yes, but that makes me love you even more. I’m your little dog, Demetrius. The more you beat me, the more I’ll love you. Treat me like you would treat a dog—kick me, hit me, neglect me, try to lose me. Just let me follow behind you, even though I’m not good enough for you. Could I ask for a worse place in your heart than to be treated as you would treat a dog? And yet I would consider it an honor to be your dog."
Tempt not too much the hatred of my spirit. For I am sick when I do look on thee.,Don’t push it. Just looking at you makes me sick.
And I am sick when I look not on you.,And I get sick when I can’t look at you.
"You do impeach your modesty too much, Into the hands of one that loves you not, To trust the opportunity of night And the ill counsel of a desert place With the rich worth of your virginity.",You’re risking your reputation by leaving the city and stalking someone who doesn’t love you. Standing around alone in a deserted area in the middle of the night isn’t the best way to protect your virginity.
"It is not night when I do see your face. Therefore I think I am not in the night. Nor doth this wood lack worlds of company, For you in my respect are all the world. When all the world is here to look on me?","I rely on your virtue to protect me. And because I can see your shining face, it doesn’t feel like nighttime to me. This forest doesn’t seem deserted when you’re here, because you are all the world to me. So how can anyone say I’m alone, when the whole world is here to look at me?"
"I’ll run from thee and hide me in the brakes, And leave thee to the mercy of wild beasts.","I’ll run away from you and hide in the bushes, and leave you to the mercy of wild animals."
The wildest hath not such a heart as you.,The wildest animal isn’t as cruel as you are. Run whenever you want to. The story of Daphne and Apollo will be changed:
"Apollo flies and Daphne holds the chase. The dove pursues the griffin. The mild hind Makes speed to catch the tiger—bootless speed, When cowardice pursues and valor flies.","the lustful god Apollo runs away from the virginal nymph Daphne who pursues him, the dove chases after the griffin, which is usually its predator, and the gentle deer tries to hunt down the tiger—speed is useless when the cowardly person chases and the brave person runs away."
"Or if thou follow me, do not believe But I shall do thee mischief in the wood.","I’m not sticking around to listen to you any longer. Leave me alone. Or if you follow me, you’d better understand that I’ll do something bad to you in the forest."
"Ay, in the temple, in the town, the field You do me mischief. Fie, Demetrius! We cannot fight for love as men may do. We should be wooed and were not made to woo.","Yes, you already hurt me in the church, in the town, and in the fields. Shame on you, Demetrius! Your behavior is an insult to all women. We cannot fight for love as men can. We should be pursued and courted. We weren’t made to do the pursuing."
"I’ll follow thee and make a heaven of hell, To die upon the hand I love so well.",I’ll follow you and turn this hell I’m in into a kind of heaven. It would be heavenly to be killed by someone I love so much.
Thou shalt fly him and he shall seek thy love.,"Goodbye, nymph. Before he leaves this part of the forest, you’ll change places: you’ll be the one running away, and he’ll be in love with you."
"Hast thou the flower there? Welcome, wanderer.","Do you have the flower? Welcome, traveler."
"Ay, there it is.","Yes, here it is."
"I pray thee, give it me. (takes flower from ROBIN) Where oxlips and the nodding violet grows, Quite overcanopied with luscious woodbine, With sweet musk roses and with eglantine.","Please, give it to me. (he takes the flower from ROBIN) I know a place where wild thyme blooms, and oxlips and violets grow. It’s covered over with luscious honeysuckle, sweet muskroses and sweetbrier."
"There sleeps Titania sometime of the night, And there the snake throws her enameled skin, Weed wide enough to wrap a fairy in. And with the juice of this I’ll streak her eyes And make her full of hateful fantasies. Take thou some of it and seek through this grove: A sweet Athenian lady is in love With a disdainful youth. Anoint his eyes. But do it when the next thing he espies By the Athenian garments he hath on. Effect it with some care, that he may prove More fond on her than she upon her love. And look thou meet me ere the first cock crow.","Titania sleeps there sometimes at night, lulled to sleep among the flowers by dances and other delights. Snakes shed their skin there, and the shed skin is wide enough to wrap a fairy in. I’ll put the juice of this flower on Titania’s eyes, and fill her with horrible delusions and desires. (he gives ROBIN part of the flower) You take some of it too, and look around in this part of the forest. A sweet Athenian lady is in love with a young man who wants nothing to do with her. Put some of this flower’s juice on his eyes, and make sure to do it in such a way that the next thing he sees will be the lady. You’ll be able to tell it’s him because he’s wearing Athenian clothes. Do it carefully, so that he’ll end up loving her more than she loves him. And then make sure to meet me before the rooster’s first crow at dawn."
"Fear not, my lord. Your servant shall do so.","Don’t worry, sir. I’m at your service."
"Come now, a roundel and a fairy song. Then for the third part of a minute, hence— Some to kill cankers in the musk-rose buds, Some war with reremice for their leathern wings The clamorous owl that nightly hoots and wonders At our quaint spirits. Sing me now asleep. Then to your offices and let me rest.","Come, dance in a circle and sing a fairy song, and then go off for a while to do your work. Some of you will kill the worms infesting the rosebuds, some of you will fight with bats to get their leathery wings, so we can make coats for my small elves. Some of you will keep that loud owl away, the one that hoots and wonders every night at us dainty fairies. Sing me to sleep now, and then go off to do your duties and let me rest."
"(sings) You spotted snakes with double tongue, Thorny hedgehogs, be not seen. Newts and blindworms, do no wrong. Come not near our fairy queen.","(singing) Snakes with forked tongues, And porcupines, don’t be seen. Deadly lizards, don’t be mean. Don’t come near our fairy queen."
"Philomel, with melody Sing in our sweet lullaby. Lulla, lulla, lullaby, lulla, lulla, lullaby. Never harm Nor spell nor charm Come our lovely lady nigh. So good night, with lullaby.","(singing) Nightingale, melodiously Sing our sweet lullaby. Lulla, lulla, lullaby, lulla, lulla, lullaby. Let no harm Or spell or charm Come near our lovely lady. Say good night with a lullaby."
"(sings) Weaving spiders, come not here. Hence, you long-legged spinners, hence!","(singing) Spiders with your webs, stay away. You long-legged things, begone!"
"Beetles black, approach not near. Worm nor snail, do no offense.","Black beetles, don’t come near. Worms and snails, don’t be bad."
"(sing) Philomel, with melody Sing in our sweet lullaby. Lulla, lulla, lullaby, lulla, lulla, lullaby. Never harm Nor spell nor charm Come our lovely lady nigh. So good night, with lullaby.","(singing) Nightingale, melodiously Sing our sweet lullaby. Lulla, lulla, lullaby, lulla, lulla, lullaby. Let no harm Or spell or charm Come near our lovely lady. Say good night with a lullaby."
"Hence, away! Now all is well. One aloof stand sentinel.","Okay, let’s go! Everything’s fine now. One of us will stay and stand guard."
"What thou seest when thou dost wake, Do it for thy true love take. Love and languish for his sake. Be it ounce or cat or bear, In thy eye that shall appear, When thou wakest, it is thy dear. Wake when some vile thing is near.","(he squeezes flower juice on TITANIA ’s eyelids) Whatever you see first when you wake up, think of it as your true love. Love him and yearn for him, even if he’s a lynx, a cat, a bear, a leopard, or a wild boar. Whatever’s there when you wake up will be dear to you. Wake up when something nasty is nearby."
"Fair love, you faint with wandering in the wood.","My love, you look like you’re about to faint from wandering in the woods for so long, and to tell you the truth, I’ve gotten us lost."
"We’ll rest us, Hermia, if you think it good. And tarry for the comfort of the day.","We’ll take a rest, if you think it’s a good idea, and wait until daylight when things will be easier."
"Be it so, Lysander. Find you out a bed, For I upon this bank will rest my head.","Let’s do that, Lysander. Find something to cushion you while you sleep. I’m going to rest my head on this little slope."
"One heart, one bed, two bosoms, and one troth.","We can both sleep together on the grass. We’ll have one heart, one bed, two bodies, and one faithful vow."
"Nay, good Lysander. For my sake, my dear, Lie further off yet. Do not lie so near.","No, Lysander. Please, for my sake, sleep a little farther away. Don’t sleep so close to me."
"O, take the sense, sweet, of my innocence. I mean that my heart unto yours is knit So that but one heart we can make of it. Two bosoms interchainèd with an oath— So then two bosoms and a single troth. For, lying so, Hermia, I do not lie.","Oh, sweetheart, I didn’t mean anything naughty when I said that. When lovers talk to each other, their hearts should understand each other. I just meant that our hearts are joined, so we can almost think of them as one heart. Our two bodies are linked together by the promises we’ve made to each other, so there are two bodies and one faithful vow. So let me sleep next to you. If I lie next to you, I won’t lie to you—I’ll be faithful and respect you."
"Lysander riddles very prettily. Now much beshrew my manners and my pride If Hermia meant to say Lysander lied. Lie further off in human modesty. Such separation as may well be said Becomes a virtuous bachelor and a maid. So far be distant. And, good night, sweet friend.","Lysander’s got a way with words. I would certainly be rude and shameful if I had implied that you were a liar. But please, darling, sleep a little farther away so we can behave properly. It’s only proper for a well-behaved bachelor and a well-behaved girl to be physically separated like this. Stay away for now, and good night, my sweet friend. I hope your love for me remains this strong for your entire life!"
"Amen, amen to that fair prayer, say I. And then end life when I end loyalty! Here is my bed. Sleep give thee all his rest!",Amen to that. I hope my life ends before my loyalty to you does. I’ll sleep over here. Sleep well!
With half that wish the wisher’s eyes be pressed!,You sleep well too.
"Through the forest have I gone. But Athenian found I none, On whose eyes I might approve This flower’s force in stirring love. Night and silence! Who is here? Weeds of Athens he doth wear. This is he, my master said, Despisèd the Athenian maid. And here the maiden, sleeping sound On the dank and dirty ground. Pretty soul! She durst not lie Near this lack-love, this kill-courtesy. (squeezes flower juice on LYSANDER’s eyelids) Churl, upon thy eyes I throw All the power this charm doth owe. When thou wakest, let love forbid Sleep his seat on thy eyelid. So awake when I am gone, For I must now to Oberon.","I’ve been through the entire forest, but I haven’t found any Athenian man to use the flower on. (he sees LYSANDER and HERMIA) Wait a second, who’s this? He’s wearing Athenian clothes. This must be the guy who rejected the Athenian girl. And here’s the girl, sleeping soundly on the damp and dirty ground. Pretty girl! She shouldn’t lie near this rude and heartless man. (he puts flower juice on LYSANDER ’s eyelids) Jerk, I throw all the power of this magic charm on your eyes. When you wake up, let love keep you from going back to sleep. Wake up when I’m gone, because now I have to go to Oberon."
"Stay, though thou kill me, sweet Demetrius.","Stop, Demetrius! Stop, even if only to kill me."
"I charge thee, hence, and do not haunt me thus.","I’m telling you, get out of here, and don’t follow me around like this."
"O, wilt thou darkling leave me? Do not so.","Oh, will you leave me alone in the dark? Don’t."
"Stay, on thy peril. I alone will go.",Stay here at your own risk. I’m going on alone.
"Oh, I am out of breath in this fond chase. The more my prayer, the lesser is my grace. Happy is Hermia, wheresoe'er she lies, For she hath blessèd and attractive eyes. If so, my eyes are oftener washed than hers. No, no, I am as ugly as a bear, For beasts that meet me run away for fear. Therefore no marvel though Demetrius What wicked and dissembling glass of mine Made me compare with Hermia’s sphery eyne? (sees LYSANDER)But who is here? Lysander, on the ground? Dead or asleep? I see no blood, no wound.—","Oh, I’m out of breath from this foolish chase. The more I pray, the less I get out of it. Hermia is lucky, wherever she is, because she has beautiful eyes. How did her eyes get so bright? Not from crying. If that’s the case, tears wash my eyes more than hers. No, no, I’m as ugly as a bear, since animals that see me run away in terror. So it’s no surprise that Demetrius runs away from me as if I were a monster. What evil and deceitful mirror made me think I could rival Hermia’s starry eyes? (she sees LYSANDER) But who’s this here? Lysander, on the ground? Is he dead or sleeping? I don’t see any blood or injuries—Lysander, if you’re alive, wake up."
"(waking) And run through fire I will for thy sweet sake. Transparent Helena! Nature shows art That through thy bosom makes me see thy heart. Where is Demetrius? Oh, how fit a word","(waking up) I’d even run through fire if you told me to. Radiant, beautiful Helena! I feel like Mother Nature has allowed me to see into your heart, as if by magic. Where is Demetrius? Oh, I’d kill that name with my sword if I could!"
"Do not say so, Lysander. Say not so. What though he love your Hermia? Lord, what though? Yet Hermia still loves you. Then be content.","Don’t say that, Lysander. Don’t say that. Why do you care that he loves Hermia? What does it matter? Hermia still loves you, so be happy."
"Content with Hermia? No. I do repent Not Hermia but Helena I love. Who will not change a raven for a dove? The will of man is by his reason swayed, And reason says you are the worthier maid.","Happy with Hermia? No. I regret all the boring time I wasted with her. I don’t love Hermia; I love Helena. Who wouldn’t love a dove more than a crow? A man’s desires are influenced by his logical mind, and it’s simply logical that you’re more worthy of love than Hermia is."
"So I, being young, till now ripe not to reason. And touching now the point of human skill, Reason becomes the marshal to my will And leads me to your eyes, where I o'erlook","Fruits and vegetables don’t ripen until the right season of the year. Likewise, I’m young, and my sense of reason has just ripened. I can finally see the light. My logic has more control over my desires than it used to, and it’s telling me to look into your eyes, where I see every love story ever told."
"Wherefore was I to this keen mockery born? When at your hands did I deserve this scorn? Is ’t not enough, is ’t not enough, young man, That I did never, no, nor never can, But you must flout my insufficiency? Good troth, you do me wrong, good sooth, you do, In such disdainful manner me to woo. But fare you well. Perforce I must confess Oh, that a lady of one man refused Should of another therefore be abused!","Why does everyone always make fun of me? What have I done to deserve this kind of treatment from you? Is it not enough, is it not enough, young man, that I’ll never be pretty enough to get a kind look from Demetrius? Do you have to harp on my inadequacy? My God, it’s wrong for you to woo me in such a cruel, disdainful way. But goodbye. I have to tell you, I thought you were a much kinder person than this. Oh, how awful that a lady who’s been rejected by one man should therefore be treated horribly by another one!"
"She sees not Hermia.—Hermia, sleep thou there. And never mayst thou come Lysander near! The deepest loathing to the stomach brings, Or as the heresies that men do leave Are hated most of those they did deceive, So thou, my surfeit and my heresy, And all my powers, address your love and might To honor Helen and to be her knight.","She doesn’t see Hermia—Hermia, keep sleeping, and don’t come near me ever again! Eating too many sweets makes people sick to their stomachs, and people always hate the mistakes they made in the past worse than anyone else hates those mistakes. Hermia, you’re the sweet I’ve had too much of, and the mistake I used to make, so I hate you more than anyone else does.—I’ll use all my talents and efforts to serve Helen and bring her honor."
"(waking) Help me, Lysander, help me! Do thy best To pluck this crawling serpent from my breast. Lysander, look how I do quake with fear. Methought a serpent eat my heart away, And you sat smiling at his cruel pray. Lysander!—What, removed?—Lysander, lord!— Alack, where are you? Speak, an if you hear. Speak, of all loves! I swoon almost with fear. No? Then I well perceive you all not nigh. Either death or you I’ll find immediately.","(waking up) Help me, Lysander, help me! Get this snake off of my chest. Oh, my God! What a terrible dream I just had! Lysander, look how I’m shaking from fear. I thought a snake was eating my heart while you sat smiling and watching. Lysander!—What, is he gone?—Lysander, my lord!—What, is he out of earshot? Gone? No answer, nothing? Oh, God, where are you? Say something if you can hear me. Say something, please! I’m almost fainting with fear. Nothing? Then I guess you’re nowhere nearby. I’ll find you—or die—right away."
Are we all met?,Are we all here?
"Pat, pat. And here’s a marvelous convenient place for our rehearsal. This green plot shall be our stage, this hawthorn-brake our tiring-house, and we will do it in action as we will do it before the duke.","Right on time. This is the perfect place to rehearse. This clearing will be the stage, and this hawthorn bush will be our dressing room. Let’s put on our play exactly as we’ll perform it for the duke."
Peter Quince—,Peter Quince—
"What sayest thou, bully Bottom?","What is it, jolly Bottom?"
"There are things in this comedy of Pyramus and Thisbe that will never please. First, Pyramus must draw a sword to kill himself, which the ladies cannot abide. How answer you that?","There are things in this comedy of Pyramus and Thisbe that will never work. First of all, Pyramus has to take out a sword to kill himself, which the ladies in the audience won’t be able to stand. What should we do about that?"
"By 'r lakin, a parlous fear.","By God, that’s a real problem, it’s true."
"I believe we must leave the killing out, when all is done.","I think we’ll have to leave out all the killing, come to think of it."
"Not a whit. I have a device to make all well. Write me a prologue, and let the prologue seem to say we will do no harm with our swords, and that Pyramus is not killed indeed. And for the more better assurance, tell them that I, Pyramus, am not Pyramus, but Bottom the weaver. This will put them out of fear.","Not at all! I’ve got a plan that will fix everything. Write me a prologue that I can recite to the audience before the play starts. I’ll tell them that we won’t hurt anyone with our swords, and that Pyramus isn’t really dead. And to make it even clearer, we can tell them that I’m playing Pyramus but I’m not really Pyramus—really, I’m Bottom the weaver. That’ll keep them from being afraid."
"Well. We will have such a prologue, and it shall be written in eight and six.","All right, we’ll have a prologue then. We’ll write it in alternating eight- and six-syllable lines, just like in a ballad."
"No, make it two more. Let it be written in eight and eight.","No, add a couple more syllables. Make it eight and eight."
Will not the ladies be afeard of the lion?,Won’t the ladies be scared of the lion?
"I fear it, I promise you.",I’m really worried about that.
"Masters, you ought to consider with yourselves. To bring in—God shield us!—a lion among ladies is a most dreadful thing. For there is not a more fearful wildfowl than your lion living. And we ought to look to ’t.","Sirs, you ought to think to yourself, bringing in—God forbid!—a lion amongst ladies is really terrible. There’s no scarier wild bird than the living lion, and we should remember that."
Therefore another prologue must tell he is not a lion.,So we need another prologue to tell everyone he’s not a real lion.
"Nay, you must name his name, and half his face must be seen through the lion’s neck. And he himself must speak through, saying thus—or to the same defect—“Ladies,” or “Fair ladies,” “I would wish you” or “I would request you” or “I would entreat you” “not to fear, not to tremble, my life for yours. If you think I come hither as a lion, it were pity of my life. No, I am no such thing. I am a man as other men are.” And there indeed let him name his name, and tell them plainly he is Snug the joiner.","No, we can just announce the actor’s name, and let his face show through the lion costume, and have him say something himself. He should say the following, or something else to the same defect Bottom means to say “something to the same effect.” defect —“Ladies,” or “Lovely ladies,” “I would like to ask you” or “I would like to request of you” or “I would like to beg you” “not to be afraid, and not to tremble with fear. I value your lives as highly as my own. If you thought I was a real lion, I would be risking my life. But no, I am not at all a lion. I am a man, just like other men.” And then he should say his name, and tell them plainly that he’s Snug the carpenter."
"Well, it shall be so. But there is two hard things: that is, to bring the moonlight into a chamber. For, you know, Pyramus and Thisbe meet by moonlight.","All right, that’s what we’ll do then. But there are two things we still have to figure out. How are we going to bring moonlight into a room? Because, you know, Pyramus and Thisbe meet by moonlight."
Doth the moon shine that night we play our play?,Will the moon be shining on the night we’re performing our play?
"A calendar, a calendar! Look in the almanac. Find out moonshine, find out moonshine!","We need a calendar! Look in the almanac. Look up moonshine, look up moonshine!"
"(takes out a book) Yes, it doth shine that night.","(he takes out a book) Yes, the moon will shine that night."
"Why then, may you leave a casement of the great chamber window where we play open, and the moon may shine in at the casement.","Well then, you can leave one of the windows open in the big hall where we’ll be performing, and the moon can shine in through the window."
"Ay. Or else one must come in with a bush of thorns and a lantern, and say he comes to disfigure, or to present, the person of Moonshine. Then, there is another thing: we must have a wall in the great chamber. For Pyramus and Thisbe, says the story, did talk through the chink of a wall.","Yes, or else someone will have to come in carrying a bundle of sticks and a lantern and say he’s come to disfigure, Bottom means “figure” (symbolize), not disfigure. disfigure, or represent, the character of Moonshine, because the man in the moon is supposed to carry sticks and a lantern. But there’s still another problem: we need to have a wall in the big hall, because according to the story, Pyramus and Thisbe talked through a little hole in a wall."
"You can never bring in a wall. What say you, Bottom?","You’ll never be able to bring in a wall. What do you think, Bottom?"
"Some man or other must present Wall. And let him have some plaster, or some loam, or some roughcast about him to signify wall. And let him hold his fingers thus, and through that cranny shall Pyramus and Thisbe whisper.","Someone should play the part of Wall. He can have some plaster or clay or limestone or something on him to show the audience he’s a wall. He can hold his fingers in a V-shape like this, and Pyramus and Thisbe can whisper to each other through that little crack."
"If that may be then all is well. Come, sit down, every mother’s son, and rehearse your parts.—Pyramus, you begin. When you have spoken your speech, enter into that brake.—And so everyone according to his cue.","If we can do that, everything will be all right. Now sit down, everybody, and rehearse your parts—Pyramus, you start. When you have said your lines, go hide in that bush.—Everyone else, go there too when you’re not onstage."
"So near the cradle of the fairy queen? What, a play toward? I’ll be an auditor. An actor too, perhaps, if I see cause.","(to himself) Who are these country bumpkins swaggering around so close to where the fairy queen is sleeping? What? Are they about to put on a play? I’ll watch. And I’ll act in it, too, if I feel like it."
"Speak, Pyramus.—Thisbe, stand forth.","Speak, Pyramus.—Thisbe, come forward."
"(as PYRAMUS) Thisbe, the flowers of odious savors sweet—","(as PYRAMUS) Thisbe, flowers with sweet odious smells—"
"“Odors,” “odors.”","“Odors,” “odors.”"
"(as PYRAMUS) —odors savors sweet, So hath thy breath, my dearest Thisbe dear. And by and by I will to thee appear. Stay thou but here awhile,","(as PYRAMUS) —odors and smells are like your breath, my dearest Thisbe dear. But what’s that, a voice! Wait here a while. I’ll be right back!"
(aside) A stranger Pyramus than e'er played here.,(to himself) That’s the strangest Pyramus I’ve ever seen.
Must I speak now?,Am I supposed to talk now?
"Ay, marry, must you. For you must understand he goes but to see a noise that he heard, and is to come again.","Yes, you are. You’re supposed to show that you understand that Pyramus just went to check on a noise he heard and is coming right back."
"(as THISBE ) Most radiant Pyramus, most lily-white of hue, Most brisky juvenal and eke most lovely Jew, As true as truest horse that yet would never tire. I’ll meet thee, Pyramus, at Ninny’s tomb.","(as THISBE) Most radiant Pyramus, you are as white as a lily, and the color of a red rose on a splendid rosebush, a very lively young man and also a lovely Jew. You are as reliable as a horse that never gets tired. I’ll meet you, Pyramus, at Ninny’s grave."
"“Ninus' tomb,” man. Why, you must not speak that yet. That you answer to Pyramus. You speak all your part at once, cues and all.—Pyramus, enter. Your cue is past. It is “never tire.”","That’s “Ninus’s grave,” man. And don’t say all of that yet. You’re supposed to say some of it as a reply to Pyramus. You just said all your lines at once, cues and all.—Pyramus, enter. You missed your cue. It’s “never get tired.”"
Oh. (as thisbe) As true as truest horse that yet would never tire.,Oh! (as THISBE) As reliable as a horse that never gets tired.
"(as PYRAMUS) If I were fair, Thisbe, I were only thine.","(as PYRAMUS) If I were handsome, my lovely Thisbe, I would still want only you."
"Oh, monstrous! Oh, strange! We are haunted. Pray, masters! Fly, masters! Help!","Help! It’s a monster! We’re being haunted. Run, everyone, run!"
"I’ll follow you. I’ll lead you about a round Through bog, through bush, through brake, through brier. A hog, a headless bear, sometime a fire. And neigh, and bark, and grunt, and roar, and burn, Like horse, hound, hog, bear, fire, at every turn.","I’ll follow you. I’ll run you around in circles, through bogs and bushes and woods and thorns. Sometimes I’ll take the shape of a horse, sometimes I’ll take the shape of a hound or a pig or a headless bear. Sometimes I’ll turn into fire! And I’ll neigh like a horse and bark like a hound and grunt like a pig and roar like a bear and burn like a fire at every turn."
Why do they run away? This is a knavery of them to make me afeard.,Why are they running away? This is some joke of theirs to scare me.
"O Bottom, thou art changed! What do I see on thee?","Oh, Bottom, you’ve changed! What have you got on your head?"
"What do you see? You see an ass head of your own, do you?","What do you think I’ve got on my head? You’re acting like an ass, don’t you think?"
"Bless thee, Bottom, bless thee. Thou art translated.","God bless you, Bottom, God bless you. You’ve been changed. Reborn."
"I see their knavery: this is to make an ass of me, to fright me if they could. But I will not stir from this place, do what they can. I will walk up and down here and I will sing, that they shall hear I am not afraid. (sings) The ouzel cock, so black of hue With orange-tawny bill, The throstle with his note so true, The wren with little quill—","I see what they’re up to. They want to make an ass of me, to scare me if they can. But I won’t leave this spot, no matter what they do. I’ll walk up and down and sing a song, so they’ll know I’m not afraid. (singing) The blackbird with its black feathers And its orange-and-tan beak, The thrush with its clear voice, The wren with its small, piping chirp—"
(waking) What angel wakes me from my flowery bed?,(waking up) What angel is this who’s waking me up from my bed of flowers?
"(sings) The finch, the sparrow, and the lark, The plainsong cuckoo gray, Whose note full many a man doth mark And dares not answer “Nay”—","(singing) The finch, the sparrow, and the lark, The gray cuckoo with his simple song That many men hear But they don’t dare say no to it—"
"For indeed, who would set his wit to so foolish a bird? Who would give a bird the lie, though he cry “cuckoo” never so?","Of course they don’t say “no”! Who’d waste his time talking to such a stupid bird? Who’d bother to accuse a bird of lying, Cuckoos symbolize cuckolds (men whose wives cheat on them). The cuckoo’s song was sometimes imagined as a mocking accusation that the men who hear it are cuckolds. a bird of lying, even if the bird were telling him that his wife was cheating on him?"
"I pray thee, gentle mortal, sing again. So is mine eye enthrallèd to thy shape. And thy fair virtue’s force perforce doth move me On the first view to say, to swear, I love thee.","Please sing again, sweet human. I love to listen to your voice, and I love to look at your body. I know this is the first time I’ve ever seen you, but you’re so wonderful that I can’t help swearing to you that I love you."
"Methinks, mistress, you should have little reason for that.","I don’t think you’ve got much of a reason to love me. But to tell you the truth, reason and love have very little to do with each other these days. It’s too bad some mutual friend of theirs doesn’t introduce them. Ha, ha! No, I’m just kidding."
Thou art as wise as thou art beautiful.,You’re as wise as you are beautiful.
"Not so, neither. But if I had wit enough to get out of this wood, I have enough to serve mine own turn.","No, that’s not true. But if I were smart enough to get out of this forest, I’d be wise enough to satisfy myself."
"Out of this wood do not desire to go. Thou shalt remain here whether thou wilt or no. The summer still doth tend upon my state. And I do love thee. Therefore go with me. I’ll give thee fairies to attend on thee. And they shall fetch thee jewels from the deep, And I will purge thy mortal grossness so That thou shalt like an airy spirit go.— Peaseblossom, Cobweb, Moth, and Mustardseed!","Don’t bother wishing you could leave this forest, because you’re going to stay here whether you want to or not. I’m no ordinary fairy. I rule over the summer, and I love you. So come with me. I’ll give you fairies as servants, and they’ll bring you jewels from the depths of the ocean, and sing to you while you sleep on a bed of flowers. And I’ll turn you into a spirit like us, so you won’t die as humans do.—Come here, Peaseblossom, Cobweb, Moth, and Mustardseed!"
Ready.,Ready.
And I.,Me too.
And I.,Me too.
And I.,And me too.
Where shall we go?,Where should we go?
"Be kind and courteous to this gentleman. Hop in his walks and gambol in his eyes. Feed him with apricoks and dewberries, With purple grapes, green figs, and mulberries. And for night tapers crop their waxen thighs And light them at the fiery glowworms' eyes To have my love to bed and to arise. And pluck the wings from painted butterflies Nod to him, elves, and do him courtesies.","Be kind and polite to this gentleman. Follow him around. Leap and dance for him. Feed him apricots and blackberries, with purple grapes, green figs, and mulberries. Steal honey from the bumblebees, and make candles out of the bees' wax. Light them with the light of glowworms, so my love will have light when he goes to bed and wakes up. Pluck off colorful butterfly wings, and use them to fan moonbeams away from his eyes as he sleeps. Bow to him, fairies, and curtsy to him."
"Hail, mortal.","Hello, mortal!"
Hail.,Hello!
Hail.,Hello!
Hail.,Hello!
"I cry your worships' mercy, heartily.—I beseech your worship’s name.","I beg your pardon, sirs.—Please tell me your name, sir?"
Cobweb.,Cobweb.
"Cobweb. If I cut my finger, I shall make bold with you.— Your name, honest gentleman?","I’d like to get to know you better, Mr. Cobweb. If I cut my finger, I’ll use you as a bandage to stop the bleeding.—And your name, sir?"
Peaseblossom.,Peaseblossom.
"I pray you, commend me to Mistress Squash, your mother, and to Master Peascod, your father. Good Master Peaseblossom, I shall desire you of more acquaintance too.— Your name, I beseech you, sir?","Please, give my regards to your mother, Mrs. Peapod, and your father, Mr. Peapod. Good Mr. Peaseblossom, I’d like to get to know you better too.—And you, may I ask what your name is, sir?"
Mustardseed.,Mustardseed.
"Good Master Mustardseed, I know your patience well. That same cowardly, giantlike ox-beef hath devoured many a gentleman of your house. I promise you your kindred hath made my eyes water ere now. I desire you of more acquaintance, good Master Mustardseed.","Good Mr. Mustardseed, I know you very well. Those cowardly, gigantic sides of beef have been responsible for many of your family members getting eaten as a condiment on beef. I swear to you, many members of your mustard family have made my eyes water before. I look forward to getting to know you better, Mr. Mustardseed."
"Come, wait upon him. Lead him to my bower. The moon methinks looks with a watery eye. And when she weeps, weeps every little flower, Tie up my love’s tongue. Bring him silently.","Take good care of him. Take him to my sleeping area. The moon looks sad to me. When she cries, all the little flowers cry too. They’re sad because someone is prevented from having sex—or is having it against her will. Keep my lover quiet. Bring him to me in silence."
"I wonder if Titania be awaked. Then, what it was that next came in her eye, Which she must dote on in extremity.","I wonder if Titania is awake yet, and if she is, I wonder what the first thing she saw was. Whatever it is, she must be completely in love with it now."
"Here comes my messenger.—How now, mad spirit?","Ah, here comes my messenger.—What’s going on, you crazy spirit? What havoc have you wreaked in this part of the forest?"
"My mistress with a monster is in love. Near to her close and consecrated bower, While she was in her dull and sleeping hour, A crew of patches, rude mechanicals Were met together to rehearse a play Intended for great Theseus' nuptial day. The shallowest thick-skin of that barren sort, Who Pyramus presented in their sport, When I did him at this advantage take, An ass’s nole I fixèd on his head. Anon his Thisbe must be answerèd, And forth my mimic comes. When they him spy, Or russet-pated choughs, many in sort, Rising and cawing at the gun’s report, Sever themselves and madly sweep the sky— So at his sight away his fellows fly;","My mistress Titania is in love with a monster. While she was sleeping in her bed of flowers, a group of bumbling idiots, rough workmen from Athens, got together nearby to rehearse some play they plan to perform on Theseus’s wedding day. The stupidest one, who played Pyramus in their play, finished his scene and went to sit in the bushes to wait for his next cue. I took that opportunity to stick a donkey’s head on him. When it was time for him to go back onstage and talk to his Thisbe, he came out of the bushes and everyone saw him. His friends ran away as fast as ducks scatter when they hear a hunter’s gunshot. One of them was so frightened when he heard my footsteps that he yelled, “Murder!” and called for help from Athens. They were all so afraid that they completely lost their common sense. They started to become scared of inanimate objects, terrified by the thorns and briars that catch at their clothing and pull off their sleeves and hats. I led them on in this frightened, distracted state, and left sweet"
"He “Murder!” cries and help from Athens calls. Their sense thus weak, lost with their fears thus strong, Made senseless things begin to do them wrong. For briers and thorns at their apparel snatch, I led them on in this distracted fear And left sweet Pyramus translated there. When in that moment so it came to pass, Titania waked and straightway loved an ass.","Pyramus there, transformed into someone with a donkey’s head. At that exact moment, Titania woke up and immediately fell in love with him, an ass."
"But hast thou yet latched the Athenian’s eyes With the love juice, as I did bid thee do?","This is going even better than I planned. But have you put the love juice from the flower on the eyes of that Athenian, as I asked you to do?"
"I took him sleeping—that is finished too— And the Athenian woman by his side,","Yes, I found him when he was asleep—so that’s taken care of too—and the Athenian woman was sleeping near him. When he woke up, he must have seen her."
(aside to ROBIN) Stand close. This is the same Athenian.,(speaking so that only ROBIN can hear) Step aside. Here’s the Athenian coming now.
"(aside to OBERON) This is the woman, but not this the man.","(speaking so that only OBERON can hear) That’s definitely the woman I saw, but it’s not the same man."
"Oh, why rebuke you him that loves you so? Lay breath so bitter on your bitter foe.",Why are you so rude to someone who loves you so much? Save that kind of harsh language for your worst enemy.
"For thou, I fear, hast given me cause to curse. If thou hast slain Lysander in his sleep, Being o'er shoes in blood, plunge in the deep, And kill me too.","I’m only scolding you now, but I should treat you much worse, because I’m afraid you’ve given me good reason to curse you. If you killed Lysander while he was sleeping, then you’re already up to your ankles in blood. You might as well jump right into a bloodbath and kill me, too."
"As he to me. Would he have stolen away From sleeping Hermia? I’ll believe as soon This whole Earth may be bored, and that the moon May through the center creep and so displease It cannot be but thou hast murdered him. So should a murderer look, so dead, so grim.","He was more faithful to me than the sun is to the daytime. Would he have snuck away from me while I was asleep? I’ll believe that when I believe that there’s a hole through the center of the earth, and the moon has passed all the way through to the other side. The only possibility is that you’ve murdered him. A murderer should look like you do, so pale and grim."
"So should the murdered look, and so should I, Pierced through the heart with your stern cruelty. As yonder Venus in her glimmering sphere.","That’s how someone who’s been murdered should look, and that’s how I look. You’ve pierced me through the heart with your cruelty, and yet you, the murderer, look as bright and clear as a star in the sky."
"What’s this to my Lysander? Where is he? Ah, good Demetrius, wilt thou give him me?","What does that have to do with my Lysander? Where is he? Oh, good Demetrius, will you find him for me?"
I had rather give his carcass to my hounds.,I would rather feed his corpse to my dogs.
"Of maiden’s patience. Hast thou slain him then? Henceforth be never numbered among men! Oh, once tell true, tell true even for my sake— Durst thou have looked upon him being awake, Could not a worm, an adder, do so much? An adder did it, for with doubler tongue Than thine, thou serpent, never adder stung.","Get out, dog! You’ve driven me to my wit’s end. Did you kill him, then? From now on I won’t even consider you a human being. Oh, just tell the truth for once. tell the truth, if only for my sake.—Would you have even dared to look at him when he was awake? And did you kill him while he was sleeping? Oh, how brave of you! A snake could do that as easily as you could. A snake did do it, because no snake ever had a more forked, lying tongue than you have."
"You spend your passion on a misprised mood. Nor is he dead, for aught that I can tell.","You’re getting all worked up over a misunderstanding. I didn’t kill Lysander. ?As far as I know, he’s not even dead."
"I pray thee, tell me then that he is well.",Then please tell me he’s all right.
"An if I could, what should I get therefore?","If I told you that, what would I get out of it?"
"A privilege never to see me more. See me no more, whether he be dead or no.","The privilege of never seeing me again. And now I’m going to leave your despised company. You’ll never see me again, whether or not he’s dead."
"There is no following her in this fierce vein. Here therefore for a while I will remain. So sorrow’s heaviness doth heavier grow Which now in some slight measure it will pay, If for his tender here I make some stay. (lies down and sleeps)",I can’t go after her when she’s in a rage like this. So I’ll stay here for a while. Sadness gets worse when you haven’t had enough sleep. I’ll try to sleep a little here. ( DEMETRIUS lies down and falls asleep)
"(to ROBIN) What hast thou done? Thou hast mistaken quite, Of thy misprision must perforce ensue Some true love turned, and not a false turned true.","(to ROBIN) What have you done? You’ve made a mistake and put the love-juice on someone else, someone who was truly in love. Because of your mistake someone’s true love must have turned bad, instead of this man’s false love being turned into a true love."
"Then fate o'errules that, one man holding troth, A million fail, confounding oath on oath.","In that case, it must be fate. That’s the way of the world. For every man who’s faithful to his true love, a million end up running after a different lover."
"And Helena of Athens look thou find— All fancy-sick she is and pale of cheer, With sighs of love, that costs the fresh blood dear. By some illusion see thou bring her here.","Go around the forest, moving faster than the wind, and make sure you find Helena of Athens.—She’s lovesick, and her face is pale from all the sighing she’s been doing, because sighing is bad for the blood. Bring her here with some trick or illusion, and I’ll put the charm on his eyes for when she comes."
"I go, I go. Look how I go, Swifter than arrow from the Tartar’s bow.","I go, I go, look at me go—faster than an arrow from a Tartar’s The Tartars were a people from Asia Minor famous for their archery Tartar’s bow."
"(squeezing flower juice into DEMETRIUS ’s eyes) Flower of this purple dye, Sink in apple of his eye. When his love he doth espy, Let her shine as gloriously As the Venus of the sky. Beg of her for remedy.","(putting flower juice on DEMETRIUS ’s eyelids) You purple flower, hit by Cupid’s arrow, sink into the pupils of this man’s eyes. When he sees the girl he should love, make her seem as bright to him as the evening star. Young man, when you wake up, if she’s nearby, beg her to cure your lovesickness."
"Captain of our fairy band, Helena is here at hand, And the youth, mistook by me, Shall we their fond pageant see? Lord, what fools these mortals be!","Helena is nearby, boss. The young man who I mistook for this one is there too, begging her to love him. Should we watch this ridiculous scene? Lord, what fools these mortals are!"
Stand aside. The noise they make Will cause Demetrius to awake.,Step aside. The noise they’re making will wake up Demetrius.
That must needs be sport alone. And those things do best please me That befall preposterously.,"Then the two of them will both pursue one girl. That will be funny enough, and preposterous situations are my favorite thing."
Why should you think that I should woo in scorn?,Why do you think I’m making fun of you when I tell you I love you? People don’t cry when they’re mocking someone.
"Look, when I vow, I weep. And vows so born, In their nativity all truth appears. How can these things in me seem scorn to you, Bearing the badge of faith to prove them true?","Look, when I swear that I love you, I cry, and when someone cries while he’s making a promise, he’s usually telling the truth. How can it seem like I’m making fun of you, when my tears prove that I’m sincere?"
"When truth kills truth, O devilish holy fray! These vows are Hermia’s. Will you give her o'er? Weigh oath with oath, and you will nothing weigh. Your vows to her and me, put in two scales,","You get trickier and trickier. You’ve made the same promises to me and to Hermia—they can’t both be true! They must both be false. The promises you’re making to me belong to Hermia. Will you abandon her? If you weighed the promises you made to me against the promises you made to her, they’d come out the same—they both weigh nothing. They’re lies."
I had no judgment when to her I swore.,I wasn’t thinking clearly when I made those promises to her.
"Nor none, in my mind, now you give her o'er.","And I don’t believe you’re thinking clearly now, as you break those promises."
"Demetrius loves her, and he loves not you.","Demetrius loves her, and he doesn’t love you."
"(waking) O Helena, goddess, nymph, perfect, divine! Crystal is muddy. Oh, how ripe in show Thy lips, those kissing cherries, tempting grow! That pure congealèd white, high Taurus' snow, Fanned with the eastern wind, turns to a crow This princess of pure white, this seal of bliss!","(waking up) Oh Helena, you goddess, you divine and perfect nymph! What can I compare your eyes to? Crystal isn’t as clear as they are. Oh, your lips are as ripe as a pair of tempting cherries touching each other! The pure white of the snow on a mountaintop seems black as a crow’s wing next to the whiteness of your hands. Oh, let me kiss your beautiful white hand. It’ll make me so happy!"
"O spite! O hell! I see you all are bent To set against me for your merriment. If you were civil and knew courtesy, Can you not hate me, as I know you do, But you must join in souls to mock me too? If you were men, as men you are in show, You would not use a gentle lady so","Damn it! I see you’re all determined to gang up on me for a few laughs. If you had any manners at all, you wouldn’t treat me like this. Can’t you just hate me, as I know you do? Do you have to get together to humiliate me too? If you were real men, as you pretend to be, you wouldn’t treat a lady this way, making vows and promises and praising my beauty when I know you’re really both disgusted by me. You’re competing for"
"When I am sure you hate me with your hearts. You both are rivals, and love Hermia, And now both rivals to mock Helena— A trim exploit, a manly enterprise, With your derision! None of noble sort Would so offend a virgin, and extort A poor soul’s patience, all to make you sport.","Hermia’s love, and now you’re competing to see which one of you can make fun of me the most. That’s a great idea, a really manly thing to do—making a poor girl cry! No respectable person would offend an innocent girl just to have some fun."
"You are unkind, Demetrius. Be not so. And here, with all good will, with all my heart, In Hermia’s love I yield you up my part. And yours of Helena to me bequeath, Whom I do love and will do till my death.","Don’t be cruel, Demetrius. I know you love Hermia, and you know I know it. Right here, right now, I swear I’m giving up all my claims on her and handing her to you. In exchange, give up your claim to love Helena, since I love her and will love her until I die."
Never did mockers waste more idle breath.,Nobody’s ever gone to so much trouble just to make fun of someone.
"Lysander, keep thy Hermia. I will none. If e'er I loved her, all that love is gone. My heart to her but as guest-wise sojourned, And now to Helen is it home returned,","Lysander, keep your Hermia. I don’t want her. If I ever loved her, all that love is gone now. My love for her was temporary. Now I’ll love Helena forever."
"Helen, it is not so.","Helena, it’s not true."
"Disparage not the faith thou dost not know, Lest to thy peril thou aby it dear. Look, where thy love comes. Yonder is thy dear.","Don’t insult a deep love that you don’t understand, or you’ll pay the price. Look, here comes the woman you love."
"The ear more quick of apprehension makes. Wherein it doth impair the seeing sense, It pays the hearing double recompense.","It’s hard to see clearly in the dark of night, but it’s easier to hear well."
"Thou art not by mine eye, Lysander, found. But why unkindly didst thou leave me so?","I couldn’t see you, Lysander, but I heard your voice, and that’s how I found you. Why did you leave me alone so unkindly?"
"Why should he stay, whom love doth press to go?",Why stay when love tells you to go?
What love could press Lysander from my side?,But what love could make my Lysander leave me?
"Lysander’s love, that would not let him bide, Than all yon fiery oes and eyes of light. Why seek’st thou me? Could not this make thee know The hate I bear thee made me leave thee so?","I had to hurry to my love, beautiful Helena, who lights up the night better than all those fiery stars. Why are you looking for me? Didn’t you figure out that I left you because I hate you?"
You speak not as you think. It cannot be.,You can’t mean what you’re saying. It’s impossible.
"Now I perceive they have conjoined all three To fashion this false sport, in spite of me.— Injurious Hermia! Most ungrateful maid! Have you conspired, have you with these contrived Is all the counsel that we two have shared, The sisters' vows, the hours that we have spent When we have chid the hasty-footed time For parting us—oh, is it all forgot? We, Hermia, like two artificial gods, Have with our needles created both one flower, Both on one sampler, sitting on one cushion, Both warbling of one song, both in one key, Had been incorporate. So we grew together, Like to a double cherry—seeming parted But yet an union in partition— Two lovely berries molded on one stem;","So, she’s in on this too! Now I see that all three of them have gotten together to play this cruel trick on me. Hurtful Hermia, you ungrateful girl, have you conspired with these two to provoke me with this horrible teasing? Have you forgotten all the talks we’ve had together, the vows we made to be like sisters to one another, all the hours we spent together, wishing that we never had to say goodbye—have you forgotten? Our friendship in our schooldays, our childhood innocence? We used to sit together and sew one flower with our two needles, sewing it on one piece of cloth, sitting on the same cushion, singing one song in the same key, as if our hands, our sides, our voices and our minds were stuck together. We grew together like twin cherries—which seemed to be separate but were also together—two lovely cherries on one stem."
"Two of the first, like coats in heraldry, Due but to one and crownèd with one crest. And will you rent our ancient love asunder To join with men in scorning your poor friend? Our sex, as well as I, may chide you for it, Though I alone do feel the injury.","We seemed to have two separate bodies, but we had one heart. Do you want to destroy our old friendship by joining these men to insult your poor friend? It’s not friendly, and it’s not ladylike. All women would be angry with you for doing it, even though I’m the only one who’s hurt by it."
I am amazèd at your passionate words. I scorn you not. It seems that you scorn me.,I’m completely dumbfounded by what you’re saying. I’m not insulting you. It sounds more like you’re insulting me.
"To follow me and praise my eyes and face? And made your other love, Demetrius— Who even but now did spurn me with his foot— To call me goddess, nymph, divine, and rare, To her he hates? And wherefore doth Lysander Deny your love, so rich within his soul, And tender me, forsooth, affection, But by your setting on, by your consent? So hung upon with love, so fortunate— But miserable most, to love unloved? This you should pity rather than despise.","Come on, confess. Didn’t you send Lysander, as an insult, to follow me around praising my eyes and my face? Haven’t you made your other love, Demetrius—who kicked me with his foot not long ago—call me a goddess and a divine, rare, precious, heavenly creature? Why does he talk like that to a girl he can’t stand? And why does Lysander deny that he loves you, when he loves you so deeply? Why would he show me any affection, unless you told him to? Why does it matter that I’m not as lucky or lovable as you are and that the love I feel is unrequited? You should pity me for that reason, not hate me."
I understand not what you mean by this.,I don’t know what you’re talking about.
"Make mouths upon me when I turn my back, Wink each at other, hold the sweet jest up— This sport, well carried, shall be chronicled.","Oh, fine. All right, go ahead, keep up your little game, pretend to be sympathetic, but then nudge each other and wink and make faces at me when I turn my back. Keep up your wonderful game. You’re doing such a good job on this trick, someone should write a book about it."
"If you have any pity, grace, or manners, But fare ye well. 'Tis partly my own fault, Which death or absence soon shall remedy.","If you had any sense of pity, or manners, you wouldn’t pretend to fight over me like this. But goodbye. It’s partly my own fault, since I followed you here. Leaving—or dying—will soon take care of everything."
"Stay, gentle Helena. Hear my excuse. My love, my life, my soul, fair Helena!","Stay, lovely Helena. Listen to my excuse. My love, my life, my soul, beautiful Helena!"
"Oh, excellent!",That’s a good one.
"(to LYSANDER) Sweet, do not scorn her so.","(to LYSANDER) Don’t insult her like that, Lysander darling."
"If she cannot entreat, I can compel.","(to LYSANDER) If Hermia’s begging can’t make you stop insulting Helena, I can force you to do so."
Thou canst compel no more than she entreat. Thy threats have no more strength than her weak prayers.— I swear by that which I will lose for thee To prove him false that says I love thee not.,"You can’t force me any more than Hermia can beg me. Your threats are no stronger than her whining.—Helena, I love you. I swear I do. I’ll give my life for you, just to prove this guy wrong when he says I don’t love you."
I say I love thee more than he can do.,I say that I love you more than he does.
"If thou say so, withdraw and prove it too.","If that’s what you say, go fight a duel with me and prove it."
"Quick, come.",You’re on. Let’s do it.
"Lysander, whereto tends all this?","Lysander, where are you going with all this?"
"(to HERMIA) Away, you Ethiope!","(to HERMIA) Get away, you African!"
"(to HERMIA) No, no. He’ll Seem to break loose.","(to HERMIA) No, no. He’ll act like he’s going to break free from you, Hermia."
"(to LYSANDER) Take on as you would follow,","(to LYSANDER) Pretend like you’re going to follow me, but then don’t come. You’re a coward, get out of here!"
"(to HERMIA) Hang off, thou cat, thou burr! Vile thing, let loose Or I will shake thee from me like a serpent.","(to HERMIA) Stop hanging on me, you cat, you thorn. Let go of me, or I’ll shake you off like a snake."
"Why are you grown so rude? What change is this, Sweet love?","Why have you gotten so rude? What’s happened to you, my darling?"
"Thy love? Out, tawny Tartar, out!","Your darling? Get out, you dark-skinned gypsy! Get out, you horrible poison. Get out!"
Do you not jest?,Are you joking?
"Yes, sooth, and so do you.","Of course he is, and so are you."
"Demetrius, I will keep my word with thee.","Demetrius, I’m ready to fight you as promised."
"I would I had your bond, for I perceive A weak bond holds you. I’ll not trust your word.",I wish we had a signed legal contract. I can see you don’t keep your promises very well. I don’t trust you.
"Although I hate her, I’ll not harm her so.","What? Do you want me to hit Hermia, hurt her, kill her? Sure, I hate her, but I wouldn’t hurt her."
"(to LYSANDER) What, can you do me greater harm than hate? Hate me? Wherefore? O me! What news, my love? I am as fair now as I was erewhile. Since night you loved me. Yet since night you left me. Why then, you left me—Oh, the gods forbid!— In earnest, shall I say?","(to LYSANDER) Can you hurt me any more than by saying you hate me? Hate me? Why? What’s happened to you, my love? Am I not Hermia? Aren’t you Lysander? I’m as beautiful now as I was a little while ago. You still loved me when we fell asleep, but when you woke up you left me. So you left me—Oh, God help me!—For real?"
"Ay, by my life, Therefore be out of hope, of question, of doubt.","I certainly did, and I never wanted to see you again. So stop hoping and wondering what I mean."
"Be certain, nothing truer. 'Tis no jest That I do hate thee and love Helena.",I’ve spelled it out for you clearly. It’s no joke. I hate you and love Helena.
"O me! You thief of love! What, have you come by night And stol'n my love’s heart from him?","Oh, no! (to HELENA) You trickster, you snake! You thief! What, did you sneak in at night and steal my love’s heart from him?"
"Fine, i' faith! Have you no modesty, no maiden shame, No touch of bashfulness? What, will you tear Fie, fie! You counterfeit, you puppet, you!","Oh, that’s very nice! You ought to be ashamed of yourself! You’re going to make me mad enough to answer you? Damn you, you faker, you puppet!"
"“Puppet”? Why so?—Ay, that way goes the game. Now I perceive that she hath made compare Between our statures. She hath urged her height, Her height, forsooth, she hath prevailed with him.— And are you grown so high in his esteem Because I am so dwarfish and so low? How low am I, thou painted maypole? Speak. But that my nails can reach unto thine eyes.","“Puppet”? Why “puppet”?—Oh, I see where this is going. She’s talking about our difference in height. She’s paraded in front of him to show off how tall she is. She won him over with her height.—Does he have such a high opinion of you because I’m so short? Is that it? So how short am I, you painted barber pole? Tell me. How short am I? I’m not too short to gouge your eyes out with my fingernails."
"(to LYSANDER and DEMETRIUS) I pray you, though you mock me, gentlemen, Let her not hurt me. I was never cursed. I am a right maid for my cowardice. Let her not strike me. You perhaps may think, Because she is something lower than myself, That I can match her.","(to LYSANDER and DEMETRIUS) Please don’t let her hurt me, gentlemen, however much you want to tease me. I never was much good with insults. I’m not mean and catty like her. I’m a nice shy girl. Please don’t let her hit me. Maybe you think that because she’s shorter than me I can take her."
"“Lower”? Hark, again!","“Shorter!” See, she’s doing it again!"
"I evermore did love you, Hermia, Did ever keep your counsels, never wronged you— Save that, in love unto Demetrius, I told him of your stealth unto this wood. But he hath chid me hence and threatened me To strike me, spurn me—nay, to kill me too. And now, so you will let me quiet go, To Athens will I bear my folly back You see how simple and how fond I am.","Good Hermia, please don’t act so bitter toward me. I always loved you, Hermia, and gave you advice. I never did anything to hurt you—except once, when I told Demetrius that you planned to sneak off into this forest. And I only did that because I loved Demetrius so much. He followed you. And I followed him because I loved him. But he told me to get lost and threatened to hit me, kick me—even kill me. Now just let me go quietly back to Athens. I’ll carry my mistakes back with me. I won’t follow you anymore. Please let me go. You see how naïve and foolish I’ve been."
"Why, get you gone! Who is ’t that hinders you?","Well, get out of here then! What’s keeping you?"
"A foolish heart, that I leave here behind.","My stupid heart, which I’m leaving behind here."
"What, with Lysander?","What, you’re leaving it with Lysander?"
With Demetrius.,"No, with Demetrius."
"Be not afraid. She shall not harm thee, Helena.","Don’t be afraid. She can’t hurt you, Helena."
"(to LYSANDER) No, sir, she shall not, though you take her part.","(to LYSANDER) That’s right, Hermia won’t hurt Helena even if you try to help her."
"Oh, when she’s angry, she is keen and shrewd! She was a vixen when she went to school.","Oh, when you get her angry, she’s a good fighter, and vicious too. She was a hellcat in school. And she’s fierce, even though she’s little."
“Little” again? Nothing but “low” and “little”!— Why will you suffer her to flout me thus? Let me come to her.,“Little” again? Nothing but “little” and “short”!— Why are you letting her insult me like this? Let me at her!.
"(to HERMIA) Get you gone, you dwarf, You bead, you acorn!","(to HERMIA) Get lost, you dwarf, you tiny little weed, you scrap, you acorn!"
You are too officious In her behalf that scorns your services. Let her alone. Speak not of Helena. Take not her part. For if thou dost intend Thou shalt aby it.,"You’re doing too much to defend a woman who wants nothing to do with you. Leave Hermia alone. Don’t talk about Helena. Don’t take Helena’s side. If you continue treating Hermia so badly, you’ll pay for it."
"Now she holds me not. Now follow, if thou darest, to try whose right, Of thine or mine, is most in Helena.","Hermia’s not holding onto me anymore. Follow me if you’re brave enough, and we’ll fight over Helena."
"“Follow”? Nay, I’ll go with thee, cheek by jowl.","“Follow”? No, I’ll walk right next to you, side by side."
"Nay, go not back.",All this fighting is because of you. Stay where you are.
"I will not trust you, I, Nor longer stay in your curst company. Your hands than mine are quicker for a fray. My legs are longer though, to run away.","I’m not sticking around here any more. I don’t trust you. You might be a better fighter than I am, but my legs are longer and I can run away faster."
I am amazed and know not what to say.,I just can’t believe any of this. I don’t know what to say.
"(to ROBIN) This is thy negligence. Still thou mistakest, Or else committ’st thy knaveries willfully.","(to ROBIN) This is all your fault. You make mistakes constantly, or else you cause this kind of trouble on purpose."
"Believe me, King of Shadows, I mistook. Did not you tell me I should know the man And so far blameless proves my enterprise, That I have 'nointed an Athenian’s eyes. And so far am I glad it so did sort, As this their jangling I esteem a sport.","Believe me, King of Illusions, I made a mistake. Didn’t you tell me that I’d be able to recognize the man by the Athenian clothes he was wearing? So far I’ve done exactly what I was supposed to do—I put the love potion on an Athenian’s eyes. And so far I’m pleased with the way things have turned out, since I find all of this commotion very entertaining."
"Hie therefore, Robin, overcast the night. The starry welkin cover thou anon With drooping fog as black as Acheron, And lead these testy rivals so astray Like to Lysander sometime frame thy tongue, Then stir Demetrius up with bitter wrong. And sometime rail thou like Demetrius. And from each other look thou lead them thus, With leaden legs and batty wings doth creep. (gives ROBIN another flower) Then crush this herb into Lysander’s eye, Whose liquor hath this virtuous property And make his eyeballs roll with wonted sight. When they next wake, all this derision Shall seem a dream and fruitless vision. And back to Athens shall the lovers wend, Whiles I in this affair do thee employ, I’ll to my queen and beg her Indian boy. And then I will her charmèd eye release From monster’s view, and all things shall be peace.","As you can see, these lovers are looking for a place to fight. Hurry up, Robin, and make the night dark and cloudy. Cover the sky with a low-hanging fog, as dark as hell, and get these overeager rivals so completely lost in the woods that they can’t run into each other. Imitate Lysander’s voice and egg Demetrius on with insults. Then rant for a while in Demetrius’s voice, and egg Lysander on. That way you’ll get them away from each other until they’re so exhausted that they’ll sleep like the dead. ( OBERON gives a new flower to ROBIN) When they’re asleep, crush some of this flower’s juice into Lysander’s eyes. The flower’s juice has the power to erase all the damage that’s been done to his eyes, and to make him see normally, the way he used to. When they wake up, all this trouble and conflict will seem like a dream or a meaningless vision. Then the lovers will go back to Athens, united together until death. While you’re busy with that, I’ll go see Queen Titania and ask her once again for the Indian boy. And then I’ll undo the spell that I cast over her, so she won’t be in love with that monster anymore. Then everything will be peaceful again."
"For night’s swift dragons cut the clouds full fast, And yonder shines Aurora’s harbinger, At whose approach, ghosts, wandering here and there, Troop home to churchyards. Damnèd spirits all, Already to their wormy beds are gone. For fear lest day should look their shames upon, They willfully themselves exile from light And must for aye consort with black-browed night.","We’ve got to act fast, my lord of the fairies. Night’s fading quickly, and in the distance the morning star is shining, warning us that dawn is coming. At dawn, the ghosts that have been wandering around all night go home to the graveyards. The souls of people who weren’t buried in holy ground, but instead lie rotting by the side of the road or at the bottom of a river, have already gone back to their wormy graves. They weren’t buried in a real graveyard because they committed suicide, and they don’t want their shame to be seen in daylight, so they avoid sunlight and stay forever in the darkness of night."
"I with the morning’s love have oft made sport, And like a forester the groves may tread Even till the eastern gate, all fiery red, Opening on Neptune with fair blessèd beams, But notwithstanding, haste. Make no delay. We may effect this business yet ere day.","But we’re not like that. We’re a different kind of spirit, and we don’t have to run away from the sunlight. I like the morning. I often wander around in the woods like a forest ranger until the sun rises in the fiery red sky over the ocean, turning the salty green water to gold. But you should hurry anyway. Don’t delay. We still have time to get all of this done before daybreak."
"Up and down, up and down, I will lead them up and down. I am feared in field and town. Goblin, lead them up and down. Here comes one.","Up and down, up and down, I will lead them up and down. The people fear me in the country and the town. Goblin, lead them up and down. Here comes one of them now."
"Where art thou, proud Demetrius? Speak thou now.","Where are you, Demetrius, you arrogant bastard? Say something."
"Here, villain. Drawn and ready. Where art thou?","(in DEMETRIUS’s voice) I’m over here, you villain, with my sword out and ready to fight. Where are you?"
I will be with thee straight.,I’m coming.
(as DEMETRIUS) Follow me then To plainer ground.,(in DEMETRIUS’s voice) Let’s go to a flatter area where we can fight more easily.
"Lysander, speak again! Speak! In some bush? Where dost thou hide thy head?","Lysander, say something! You coward, did you run away from me? Say something! Are you behind some bush? Where are you hiding?"
"(as LYSANDER) Thou coward, art thou bragging to the stars, Telling the bushes that thou look’st for wars, And wilt not come? Come, recreant. Come, thou child! That draws a sword on thee.","(in LYSANDER’s voice) You coward, are you bragging to the stars and telling the bushes that you want a fight, but then you won’t come and fight me? Come here, you coward! Come here, you child! I’ll beat you with a stick. It would be shameful to fight you with a sword, the way I would fight with a real man."
"Yea, art thou there?",Are you there?
(as LYSANDER) Follow my voice. We’ll try no manhood here.,(in LYSANDER’s voice) Follow my voice. This isn’t a good place to fight.
"He goes before me and still dares me on. The villain is much lighter-heeled than I. I followed fast, but faster he did fly, That fallen am I in dark uneven way,","He’s walking ahead of me, and he keeps daring me to follow him. When I reach the place he’s calling from, he disappears. This villain is much quicker than I am. I ran after him fast, but he ran away from me faster, so that now here I am in some dark part of the forest where the ground is uneven."
"And here will rest me. Come, thou gentle day! For if but once thou show me thy grey light, I’ll find Demetrius and revenge this spite. (sleeps)","I’ll rest here. (he lies down) I hope the pleasant daytime comes soon! As soon as the gray light of early morning appears, I’ll find Demetrius and get my revenge for this insult."
(as LYSANDER to DEMETRIUS),"(in LYSANDER’s voice) Ha, ha, ha! Hey, You coward, why aren’t you coming?"
"Abide me, if thou darest! For well I wot Thou runn’st before me, shifting every place, And darest not stand nor look me in the face. Where art thou now?","Wait for me, if you’re not too scared! I know that’s why you’re running away from me, constantly changing places—you’re afraid to stand still and wait for me. You’re scared to look me in the eye. Where are you now?"
(as LYSANDER) Come hither. I am here.,(in LYSANDER’s voice) Come here. I’m over here.
"Nay, then, thou mock’st me. Thou shalt buy this dear If ever I thy face by daylight see. Now go thy way. Faintness constraineth me To measure out my length on this cold bed. (lies down and sleeps)","No, you’re just taunting me. You’ll pay for this if I ever see you face-to-face in the daylight. Go wherever you want. I’m exhausted; I need to lie down and sleep on this cold ground. But watch out. I’ll find you at dawn. (DEMETRIUS lies down and sleeps)"
"O weary night, O long and tedious night, Abate thy hours. Shine comforts from the east, That I may back to Athens by daylight And sleep, that sometimes shuts up sorrow’s eye, Steal me awhile from mine own company. (lies down and sleeps)","Oh, what a long, tedious, exhausting night! I wish it would end. I wish the comforting light of day would shine so I can go back to Athens and get away from these people who hate me so much. I hope I’ll be able to sleep and escape my troubles for a while. People can sometimes forget their difficulties when they’re asleep. (HELENA lies down and sleeps)"
"Yet but three? Come one more. Two of both kinds make up four. Here she comes, cursed and sad. Cupid is a knavish lad Thus to make poor females mad.","Only three so far? We’re still waiting for one more. Two of both kinds makes four. Ah, here she comes, angry and sad. Cupid is a bad boy for making poor women go crazy like this."
"Never so weary, never so in woe, I can no further crawl, no further go. My legs can keep no pace with my desires. Here will I rest me till the break of day. Heavens shield Lysander if they mean a fray!","I’ve never been more exhausted or upset. I’m all wet from the dew and scratched up by thorns, and I can’t crawl any farther. I just can’t go on. My legs can’t hold themselves up. I’ll sleep here until morning. If they do fight, I hope Lysander is safe! (HERMIA lies down and sleeps)"
"On the ground Sleep sound. I’ll apply To your eye. Gentle lover, remedy. (squeezes flower juice into LYSANDER ’s eyes) When thou wakest, Thou takest True delight In the sight Of thy former lady’s eye. And the country proverb known— That every man should take his own— In your waking shall be shown. Jack shall have Jill. Nought shall go ill. The man shall have his mare again, and all shall be well.","Sleep well there on the ground. I’ll cure you, gentle lover, by putting this medicine on your eyes. (ROBIN puts the nectar of the flower on LYSANDER’s eyelids) When you wake you will be truly delighted to see the woman you once loved. And when you wake up, you’ll be a walking illustration of the well-known country proverb. “Jack will have Jill and everything will be all right.”"
"(to BOTTOM) Come, sit thee down upon this flowery bed While I thy amiable cheeks do coy, And stick musk roses in thy sleek, smooth head, And kiss thy fair large ears, my gentle joy.","(to BOTTOM) Come over here and sit down on this flowery bed while I caress those lovable cheeks. I’ll put roses on your silky, smooth head and kiss your big, beautiful ears, my gentle darling."
Where’s Peaseblossom?,Where’s Peaseblossom?
Ready.,Here.
"Scratch my head, Peaseblossom. Where’s Monsieur Cobweb?","Scratch my head, Peaseblossom. Where’s Monsieur Cobweb?"
Ready.,Here.
"Monsieur Cobweb, good monsieur, get you your weapons in your hand and kill me a red-hipped humble-bee on the top of a thistle. And, good monsieur, bring me the honey bag. Do not fret yourself too much in the action, monsieur. And good monsieur, have a care the honey bag break not. I would be loath to have you overflown with a honey bag, signor.","Monsieur Cobweb, sir, get out your weapons and kill me a striped bumblebee on a thistle, and bring me its honey. Don’t tire yourself out, monsieur. Oh, and monsieur, be careful not to break the honey-sac. I’d hate to see you drowned in honey, sir."
Where’s Monsieur Mustardseed?,Where’s Monsieur Mustardseed?
Ready.,Here.
"Give me your neaf, Monsieur Mustardseed. Pray you, leave your courtesy, good monsieur.","Give me your first, Mr. Mustardseed. Please, stop bowing, good sir."
What’s your will?,What would you like me to do?
"Nothing, good monsieur, but to help Cavalery Cobweb to scratch. I must to the barber’s, monsieur, for methinks I am marvelous hairy about the face. And I am such a tender ass, if my hair do but tickle me, I must scratch.","Nothing, good sir, except to help Sir Cobweb scratch my head. I should go to the barber’s, monsieur, because I think I’m getting really hairy around the face. And I’m such a sensitive ass that if my hair even tickles me a little, I need to scratch."
"What, wilt thou hear some music, my sweet love?","Would you like to hear some music, my sweet love?"
I have a reasonable good ear in music. Let’s have the tongs and the bones.,I have a pretty good ear for music. Let’s hear someone play the triangle and the sticks.
"Or say, sweet love, what thou desirest to eat.","Or tell me, my sweet love, what you’d like to eat."
"Truly, a peck of provender. I could munch your good dry oats. Methinks I have a great desire to a bottle of hay. Good hay, sweet hay, hath no fellow.","Actually, I’d like a few pounds of grass. I’d like to munch on some good dry oats. Or maybe I’ve got a hankering for a bundle of hay. There’s nothing like good hay, really sweet hay."
The squirrel’s hoard and fetch thee new nuts.,I have an adventurous fairy who’ll go seek out the squirrel’s secret stash and get you some fresh nuts.
"I had rather have a handful or two of dried peas. But, I pray you, let none of your people stir me. I have an exposition of sleep come upon me.",I’d rather have a handful or two of dried peas. But please don’t let any of your people wake me up. I really want to sleep now.
"Sleep thou, and I will wind thee in my arms. Fairies, be gone, and be all ways away.","Go to sleep, and I will wrap my arms around you. Fairies, go away. Run off in all directions."
"Gently entwist. The female ivy so Enrings the barky fingers of the elm. Oh, how I love thee! How I dote on thee!","I’m putting my arms around you just like the woodbine tendril gently twists itself around the sweet honeysuckle, and like the female ivy curls itself around the branches of the elm tree. Oh, how I love you! I’m so crazy about you!"
"Welcome, good Robin. Seest thou this sweet sight? For, meeting her of late behind the wood, Seeking sweet favors from this hateful fool, I did upbraid her and fall out with her. For she his hairy temples then had rounded And that same dew, which sometime on the buds Was wont to swell like round and orient pearls, Stood now within the pretty flowerets' eyes Like tears that did their own disgrace bewail. And she in mild terms begged my patience, I then did ask of her her changeling child, Which straight she gave me and her fairy sent To bear him to my bower in Fairyland. This hateful imperfection of her eyes. And, gentle Puck, take this transformèd scalp From off the head of this Athenian swain, That, he awaking when the other do, And think no more of this night’s accidents But as the fierce vexation of a dream. But first I will release the fairy queen.","Welcome, good Robin. Do you see this sweet sight? Now I’m starting to pity Titania for being so infatuated. I ran into her recently at the edge of the forest, looking for sweet presents for this hateful idiot, and I scolded her and argued with her. She had put a wreath of fresh, fragrant flowers around his hairy forehead, and the drops of dew that lay in the center of the flowers made the flowers look like they were crying with shame to be decorating the head of that ugly jackass. When I had taunted her as much as I wanted to, and she begged me very nicely to leave her alone, I asked her for the stolen Indian child. She said yes right away, and sent a fairy to bring him to my home in Fairyland. And now that I have the boy, I’ll undo the spell that makes her vision so disgustingly wrong. And, gentle Puck, take this transformed ass’s head off of the head of that Athenian man, so that when he wakes up at the same time as the rest of them do, they can all go back to Athens. They’ll only remember the events of tonight as a very unpleasant dream. But first I’ll release the fairy queen from the spell."
"Be as thou wast wont to be. Dian’s bud o'er Cupid’s flower Hath such force and blessèd power. Now, my Titania, wake you, my sweet queen.","Be like you used to be, and see like you used to see. This bud belongs to Diana, the goddess of virginity, and it has the power to undo the effects of Cupid’s flower. Now, Titania, wake up, my sweet queen."
"(waking) My Oberon, what visions have I seen!","(waking up) Oberon, I’ve had such a strange dream! I dreamed I was in love with an ass."
There lies your love.,"There’s your boyfriend, sleeping right over there."
"How came these things to pass? Oh, how mine eyes do loathe his visage now!","How did this happen? Oh, I hate looking at his face now!"
"Silence awhile.—Robin, take off this head.— Titania, music call, and strike more dead","Be quiet for a while.—Robin, take off his donkey head.—Titania, get the fairies to play some music, and make these five people sleep more soundly than humans have ever slept before."
"Music, ho! Music such as charmeth sleep!",Music! Play the kind of music that puts people to sleep.
"(taking the ass’s head off BOTTOM) Now when thou wakest, with thine own fool’s eyes peep.","(removing the ass’s head from BOTTOM) When you wake up, see things with your own foolish eyes again."
"Sound, music!—Come, my queen, take hands with me, (dances with TITANIA) Now thou and I are new in amity, And will tomorrow midnight solemnly Dance in Duke Theseus' house triumphantly, There shall the pairs of faithful lovers be Wedded, with Theseus, all in jollity.","Play the music.—Take my hands, my queen, and we’ll lull these people to sleep with our soft dancing. (he dances with TITANIA) Now that you and I are friends again, we can dance for Duke Theseus tomorrow at midnight, and bless his marriage and his marriage bed. These other lovers will get married alongside him, and they’ll all be in high spirits."
"Fairy King, attend, and mark. I do hear the morning lark.","Listen, Fairy King. I can hear the lark singing. Morning’s here."
Trip we after the night’s shade. We the globe can compass soon Swifter than the wandering moon.,"In that case, my queen, let’s travel silently and solemnly across the globe to where it’s still night, circling the earth faster than the moon does."
"Come, my lord, and in our flight That I sleeping here was found With these mortals on the ground.","While we’re walking, you can tell me how I ended up sleeping on the ground with these humans last night."
"Go, one of you, find out the forester. For now our observation is performed. My love shall hear the music of my hounds. Uncouple in the western valley. Let them go. Dispatch, I say, and find the forester.","One of you go find the forest ranger. Since we’re done with the May Day rites and it’s still so early in the morning, my love will have a chance to hear the beautiful music of my hunting dogs barking as they chase their prey. Unleash the dogs in the western valley. Let them go. Now go find the forest ranger."
"We will, fair queen, up to the mountain’s top, Of hounds and echo in conjunction.","My beautiful queen, we’ll go up the mountain and listen to the hounds as their barking echoes in the cliffs and sounds like music."
"I was with Hercules and Cadmus once, When in a wood of Crete they bayed the bear With hounds of Sparta. Never did I hear","I was with the heroes Hercules and Cadmus once, when their Spartan hunting dogs cornered a bear. I’d never heard such impressive barking before."
"The skies, the fountains, every region near Seemed all one mutual cry. I never heard So musical a discord, such sweet thunder.","The forests, the skies, the mountains, everything around us seemed to echo the barks of the hounds. I’d never heard such raucous music, such pleasant thunder."
"My hounds are bred out of the Spartan kind, With ears that sweep away the morning dew, Crook-kneed, and dew-lapped like Thessalian bulls, Slow in pursuit, but matched in mouth like bells, Each under each. A cry more tunable In Crete, in Sparta, nor in Thessaly. Judge when you hear. (sees the four sleeping lovers) But, soft! What nymphs are these?","My dogs are bred from Spartan hounds. They have the same folds of flesh around their mouths, the same sandy-colored fur, and hanging ears that brush the morning dew off the grass. They have crooked knees and folds of skin under their necks, just like the Spartan hounds. They’re not very fast in the chase, but their barking sounds like bells ringing. Each bark is perfectly in tune with the others, like notes on a scale. No one, anywhere, has ever gone hunting with a more musical pack of dogs. Judge for yourself when you hear them. (he sees the four lovers sleeping) But wait a minute! Who are these women?"
"My lord, this is my daughter here asleep. This Helena, old Nedar’s Helena. I wonder of their being here together.","My lord, that’s my daughter asleep on the ground over there, and this is Lysander here, and this is Demetrius, and this is Helena, old Nedar’s daughter. I don’t understand why they’re all here together."
"No doubt they rose up early to observe The rite of May, and hearing our intent But speak, Egeus. Is not this the day That Hermia should give answer of her choice?","They probably woke up early to celebrate May Day and came here for my celebration when they heard I’d be here. But tell me, Egeus. Isn’t today the day when Hermia has to tell us her decision about whether she’ll marry Demetrius?"
"It is, my lord.","It is, my lord."
"Go, bid the huntsmen wake them with their horns.",Go tell the hunters to blow their horns and wake them up.
"Good morrow, friends. Saint Valentine is past.","Good morning, my friends. Valentine’s Day is over."
Begin these woodbirds but to couple now?,Are you lovebirds only starting to pair up now?
"Pardon, my lord.","Forgive us, my lord."
"I pray you all, stand up.","Please, all of you, stand up."
(to LYSANDER and DEMETRIUS) I know you two are rival enemies. That hatred is so far from jealousy To sleep by hate and fear no enmity?,(to LYSANDER and DEMETRIUS) I know you two are enemies. Has the world really become so gentle and peaceful that people who hate each other have started to trust each other and sleep beside each other without being afraid?
"My lord, I shall reply amazèdly, Half sleep, half waking. But as yet, I swear, But as I think—for truly would I speak, And now do I bethink me, so it is— I came with Hermia hither. Our intent Was to be gone from Athens, where we might,","My lord, what I say may be a little confused, since I’m half asleep and half awake. I swear, at the moment I really couldn’t tell you how I ended up here. But I think—I want to tell you the truth, and now that I think about it, I think this is true—I came here with Hermia. We were planning to leave Athens to escape the Athenian law and—"
"(to THESEUS) Enough, enough, my lord. You have enough! I beg the law, the law, upon his head.— They would have stol'n away, they would, Demetrius, Thereby to have defeated you and me, Of my consent that she should be your wife.","(to THESEUS) Enough, enough, my lord. You’ve heard enough evidence! I insist that the law punish him—They were going to run away, Demetrius, they were running away to defeat us, robbing you of your wife and me of my fatherly right to decide who my son-in-law will be."
"(to THESEUS) My lord, fair Helen told me of their stealth, Of this their purpose hither to this wood. And I in fury hither followed them,","(to THESEUS) My lord, the beautiful Helena told me about their secret plan to escape into this forest. I was furious and followed them here, and the lovely Helena was so in love with me that she followed me."
"But, my good lord, I wot not by what power— But by some power it is—my love to Hermia, Melted as the snow, seems to me now As the remembrance of an idle gaud And all the faith, the virtue of my heart, The object and the pleasure of mine eye, Is only Helena. To her, my lord, Was I betrothed ere I saw Hermia. But as in health, come to my natural taste, Now I do wish it, love it, long for it, And will for evermore be true to it.","I’m not sure how it happened—but somehow, something made my love for Hermia melt away like snow. My past love for Hermia now seems like a memory of some cheap toy I used to love as a child. Now the only person I love, and believe in, and want to look at, is Helena. I was engaged to her before I ever met Hermia. Then I hated her for a time, as a sick person hates the food he usually loves. But now I have my natural taste back, like a sick person when he recovers. Now I want Helena, I love her, I long for her, and I will always be true to her."
"Fair lovers, you are fortunately met. Egeus, I will overbear your will. For in the temple by and by with us These couples shall eternally be knit.— And, for the morning now is something worn, Away with us to Athens. Three and three, We’ll hold a feast in great solemnity. Come, Hippolyta.","You pretty lovers are lucky you met me here. We’ll talk more about this later.—Egeus, I’m overriding your wishes. These couples will be married along with me and Hippolyta in the temple later today.—And now, since the morning is almost over, we’ll give up on the idea of hunting. Come with us to Athens. We three couples will celebrate with a sumptuous feast. Come, Hippolyta."
"These things seem small and undistinguishable,","What exactly just happened? The events of last night seem small and hard to see clearly, like far-off mountains that look like clouds in the distance."
"When everything seems double. Methinks I see these things with parted eye,","Yes, it’s like my eyes are out of focus, and I’m seeing everything double."
So methinks.,Me too.
"And I have found Demetrius like a jewel, Mine own, and not mine own.","I won Demetrius so easily, as if he were a precious diamond I just found lying around. It’s mine because I found it, but I feel like someone else could easily come and claim it was hers."
"Are you sure That we are awake? It seems to me The duke was here, and bid us follow him?","Are you sure we’re awake? It seems to me like we’re still sleeping, still dreaming. Do you remember seeing the duke here? Did he tell us to follow him?"
"Yea, and my father.","Yes, he did. And my father was here too."
And Hippolyta.,And Hippolyta.
And he did bid us follow to the temple.,And he told us to follow him to the temple.
"Why then, we are awake. Let’s follow him","Well, then, we’re awake. Let’s follow him. We can tell one another our dreams along the way."
"(waking) When my cue comes, call me, and I will answer. My next is “Most fair Pyramus.” Heigh-ho! Peter Quince? Flute the bellows-mender? Snout the tinker? Starveling? God’s my life, stol'n hence, and left me asleep? I have had a most rare vision. I have had a dream—past the wit of man to say what dream it was. Man is but an ass if he go about to expound this dream. Methought I was—there is no man can tell what. Methought I was, and methought I had—but man is but a patched fool if he will offer to say what methought I had. The eye of man hath not heard, the ear of man hath not seen, man’s hand is not able to taste, his tongue to conceive, nor his heart to report what my dream was. I will get Peter Quince to write a ballad of this dream.","(waking up) Tell me when my cue comes, and I’ll say my line. My next cue is “Most handsome Pyramus.” Hey! Peter Quince? Flute the bellows-repairman? Snout the handyman? Starveling? My God, they’ve all run away and left me sleeping here? What a weird dream I had.—You can’t even describe such a weird dream. You’d be an ass if you even tried to explain it. I thought I was—no, nobody can even describe what I was. I thought I was, I thought I had—but a person would be an idiot to try to say what I thought I had. No eye has ever heard, no ear has ever seen, no hand has tasted, or tongue felt, or heart described what my dream was like. I’ll get Peter Quince to write this dream down as a ballad."
"It shall be called “Bottom’s Dream” because it hath no bottom. And I will sing it in the latter end of a play before the duke. Peradventure, to make it the more gracious, I shall sing it at her death.","I’ll call it “Bottom’s Dream” because it’s so deep that it has no bottom. And I’ll sing it for the duke in the intermission of a play. Or maybe, to make it even more lovely, I’ll sing it when the heroine dies."
Have you sent to Bottom’s house? Is he come home yet?,Have you sent anyone to Bottom’s house? Has he come home yet?
He cannot be heard of. Out of doubt he is transported.,No one’s heard from him. I’m sure he’s been kidnapped.
"If he come not, then the play is marred. It goes not forward. Doth it?","If he doesn’t show up, the play is ruined. It won’t go on. Will it?"
It is not possible. You have not a man in all Athens able to discharge Pyramus but he.,"No, it would be impossible. He’s the only person in Athens who can play Pyramus."
"No, he hath simply the best wit of any handicraft man in Athens.",Definitely. He’s quite simply the smartest working-man in Athens.
"Yea, and the best person too. And he is a very paramour for a sweet voice.","Yes, and the best looking too. And his voice is the paramour of sweetness."
"You must say “paragon.” A “paramour” is, God bless us, a thing of naught.",You mean “paragon.” A “paramour” paramour = lover “paramour” is something bad.
"Masters, the duke is coming from the temple, and there is two or three lords and ladies more married. If our sport had gone forward, we had all been made men.","The duke’s leaving the temple. Two or three more lords and ladies have been married too. If we’d been able to put on our play, we would have had it made."
"O sweet bully Bottom! Thus hath he lost sixpence a day during his life. He could not have ’scaped sixpence a day. An the duke had not given him sixpence a day for playing Pyramus, I’ll be hanged.","Oh that great, funny guy, Bottom! He would have gotten a pension of six pence a day for his whole life. Six pence a day would’ve been forced on him. I’ll be damned if the duke wouldn’t have given him six pence a day for playing Pyramus."
"He would have deserved it. Sixpence a day in Pyramus, or nothing.","And he would have deserved it too. Pyramus is worth six pence a day, A pension of six pence a day would be a lot of money for a working class man. six pence a day, or it’s worth nothing!"
Where are these lads? Where are these hearts?,Where are my guys? Where are my good fellows?
Bottom! O most courageous day! O most happy hour!,"Bottom! Oh, how wonderful to see you! Oh, what a relief!"
"Masters, I am to discourse wonders—but ask me not what, for if I tell you I am no true Athenian. I will tell you everything, right as it fell out.","My friends, I’ve got some amazing things to tell you—but don’t ask me to tell you what. I swear by my Athenian citizenship that I won’t tell you anything. I’ll tell you everything exactly as it happened."
"Let us hear, sweet Bottom.","Tell us, Bottom."
"Not a word of me. All that I will tell you is that the duke hath dined. Get your apparel together, good strings to your beards, new ribbons to your pumps. Meet presently at the palace. Every man look o'er his part. For the short and the long is, our play is preferred. In any case, let Thisbe have clean linen. And let not him that plays the lion pair his nails, for they shall hang out for the lion’s claws. And most dear actors, eat no onions nor garlic, for we are to utter sweet breath. And I do not doubt but to hear them say, “It is a sweet comedy.” No more words. Away, go away!","No, you won’t get a word out of me. All I’ll tell you is that the duke has had dinner already. Now it’s time to get your costumes together. Find some good strings for tying on your false beards, and grab new ribbons to decorate your shoes. Meet me at the palace as soon as possible. Look over your lines again. Our play’s going to be performed for the duke! So make sure Thisbe’s wearing clean underwear, and make sure whoever’s playing the lion doesn’t cut his nails, because he needs them long to look like lion’s claws. And no one eat any onions or garlic. If we have sweet-smelling breath, I’m sure they’ll say “it’s a sweet play.” Now no more talking. Get busy, go!"
"'Tis strange, my Theseus, that these lovers speak of.","These lovers are saying some strange things, Theseus."
"More strange than true. I never may believe These antique fables nor these fairy toys. Lovers and madmen have such seething brains, More than cool reason ever comprehends. The lunatic, the lover, and the poet Are of imagination all compact. One sees more devils than vast hell can hold— Sees Helen’s beauty in a brow of Egypt. The poet’s eye, in fine frenzy rolling, Doth glance from heaven to Earth, from Earth to heaven. And as imagination bodies forth Turns them to shapes and gives to airy nothing A local habitation and a name. Such tricks hath strong imagination, That if it would but apprehend some joy, Or in the night, imagining some fear, How easy is a bush supposed a bear!","Yes, strange—and totally made up too. I’ll never believe any of these old legends or fairy tales. Lovers and madmen hallucinate about things that sane people just can’t understand. Lunatics, lovers, and poets all are ruled by their overactive imaginations. some people think they see devils and monsters everywhere—and they’re lunatics. Lovers are just as crazy, and think a dark-skinned gypsy is the most gorgeous woman in the world. Poets are always looking around like they’re having a fit, confusing the mundane with the otherworldly, and describing things in their writing that simply don’t exist. All these people have such strong imaginations that, when they feel happy, they assume a god or some other supernatural being is bringing that happiness to them. Or if they’re afraid of something at night, they look at the shrubbery and imagine it’s a wild bear!"
"But all the story of the night told over, And all their minds transfigured so together, And grows to something of great constancy, But, howsoever, strange and admirable.","But the story that these lovers are telling, and the fact that they all saw and heard exactly the same things, make me think there’s more going on here than imaginary fantasies. Their story is bizarre and astounding, but it’s solid and consistent."
"Here come the lovers, full of joy and mirth.— Joy, gentle friends! Joy and fresh days of love","Here come the lovers, laughing happily.—I wish you joy, my friends! I hope the days ahead are full of joy for you."
"More than to us Wait in your royal walks, your board, your bed!","We wish you even more joy, and hope joy comes to you in your royal walks, at your table, and in your royal bed!"
"Come now, what masques, what dances shall we have To wear away this long age of three hours Between our after-supper and bedtime? What revels are in hand? Is there no play, To ease the anguish of a torturing hour? Call Philostrate.","Now, what kind of entertainment do we have to fill up the long three hours between dinner and bedtime? Where is our entertainment director? What performances have been prepared? Aren’t there any plays for us to enjoy while we wait in torture for bedtime to come? Let me see Philostrate."
"Here, mighty Theseus.","Here I am, Theseus."
"Say, what abridgement have you for this evening? The lazy time if not with some delight?","Tell us what entertainment you’ve prepared for the evening. Which plays, what music? How will we pass the time without some entertainment?"
"(giving THESEUS a document) There is a brief, how many sports are ripe. Make choice of which your highness will see first.",(giving THESEUS a piece of paper) Here’s a list of all of the acts that have been prepared. Choose which one you want to see first.
"“The battle with the Centaurs, to be sung By an Athenian eunuch to the harp.” We’ll none of that. That have I told my love, In glory of my kinsman Hercules. “The riot of the tipsy Bacchanals, Tearing the Thracian singer in their rage.” That is an old device, and it was played When I from Thebes came last a conqueror.","(reading) “The battle between Hercules and the Centaurs, to be sung by an Athenian eunuch, accompanied by a harp.” No, we won’t see that. I’ve already told that story to Hippolyta, while praising my cousin Hercules. What else? “The riot of the drunk Bacchanals who rip the singer Orpheus to shreds.” That’s an old show, and I saw it the last time I came back from conquering"
"“The thrice three Muses mourning for the death Of learning, late deceased in beggary.” Not sorting with a nuptial ceremony. “A tedious brief scene of young Pyramus And his love Thisbe. Very tragical mirth.” “Merry” and “tragical”? “Tedious” and “brief”? That is hot ice and wondrous strange snow. How shall we find the concord of this discord?","Thebes. “The nine Muses mourning the death of learning and scholarship.” That’s some sharp, critical satire, and it’s not appropriate for a wedding. “A tedious short drama about young Pyramus and his love Thisbe, a very sad and tragic comedy.” A sad comedy? Short but still tedious? That’s like hot ice and strange snow. How can this drama be so many contradictory things?"
"Which is as brief as I have known a play. But by ten words, my lord, it is too long, Which makes it tedious. For in all the play There is not one word apt, one player fitted. For Pyramus therein doth kill himself. Which, when I saw rehearsed, I must confess, Made mine eyes water—but more merry tears The passion of loud laughter never shed.","It’s a play about ten words long, which is the shortest play I’ve ever heard of. But in my opinion, it’s about ten words too long. That’s why it’s tedious. In the entire play, not one word is well-written, and not one of the actors is right for his part. It’s tragic because Pyramus kills himself. I have to admit that when I saw his suicide during rehearsal, I had tears in my eyes—but they were tears of laughter."
What are they that do play it?,Who are the actors?
"Hard-handed men that work in Athens here, Which never labored in their minds till now, And now have toiled their unbreathed memories With this same play against your nuptial.",Rough workmen from Athens who never spent much time thinking. Now they’ve worn out their out-of-shape brains to put on this play for your wedding.
And we will hear it.,So let’s see it.
"No, my noble lord. It is not for you. I have heard it over, And it is nothing, nothing in the world— Unless you can find sport in their intents, Extremely stretched and conned with cru 'l pain","No, my noble lord. This play isn’t right for you. I’ve seen the whole thing, and it’s completely worthless—unless you think their bad acting and their misremembered lines—which they memorized so painfully—are funny."
"I will hear that play. For never anything can be amiss When simpleness and duty tender it. Go, bring them in.—And take your places, ladies.","I’ll watch this play. Nothing can really be bad when it’s created by simple people who try hard. Come on, bring them in. And sit down, ladies."
I love not to see wretchedness o'er charged,I don’t like seeing poor people overburdened or looking bad when they’re trying to do something good.
"Why, gentle sweet, you shall see no such thing.","You won’t see anything like that, sweetheart."
He says they can do nothing in this kind.,He just said that they’re no good at acting.
"The kinder we, to give them thanks for nothing. Our sport shall be to take what they mistake. Takes it in might, not merit. Where I have come, great clerks have purposèd To greet me with premeditated welcomes, Where I have seen them shiver and look pale, Throttle their practiced accent in their fears, And in conclusion dumbly have broke off, Not paying me a welcome. Trust me, sweet, Out of this silence yet I picked a welcome, I read as much as from the rattling tongue Of saucy and audacious eloquence. Love, therefore, and tongue-tied simplicity In least speak most, to my capacity.","Then we’re even kinder people for thanking them for something that they’re not good at. We’ll entertain ourselves by accepting their mistakes. When poor dutiful people can’t do certain things well, generous people can consider the effort they put into it rather than the effect that they produce. In my travels, great scholars have come up to me, meaning to greet me with well-rehearsed welcoming speeches, and I have seen them tremble and turn pale, and pause inappropriately in the middle of their sentences, and botch their well-rehearsed tones of voice because they’re so nervous, and then break off abruptly at the end, without actually welcoming me. Trust me, my sweet, I figured out that they were trying to welcome me even though they were silent, and that message was as clear from someone who was modest and nervously dutiful as it is from someone who is loud and audacious and eloquent. Therefore, love and tongue-tied simplicity can say the most even when they’re saying the least, in my opinion."
"So please your grace, the Prologue is addressed.","Your grace, the person who is going to deliver the prologue is ready."
Let him approach.,Let him come forward.
"(delivered by QUINCE) If we offend, it is with our good will. That you should think we come not to offend, That is the true beginning of our end. Consider then we come but in despite. We do not come as minding to contest you, Our true intent is. All for your delight The actors are at hand, and by their show You shall know all that you are like to know.","If we happen to offend you, it’s because we want to. We don’t want you to think we came here to offend you, except that we want to offend you with our good intentions. Our plan to show off our little bit of talent will wind up getting us executed. Please keep in mind we’re only here out of spite. We don’t come here with the intention of making you happy. We’re absolutely not here to delight you. The actors are ready to come out and make you sorry. By watching their show, you’ll find out everything you’re likely to know. If Quince had read this speech with the proper punctuation, it would mean “If we happen to offend you, we hope you know that we didn’t come here intending to offend you, but with the good intention of showing off our little bit of skill. That’s all we want to do. Please keep in mind that we came here only to please you. Our true intention is to delight you. We didn’t come here to make you sorry. The actors are ready…”"
This fellow doth not stand upon points.,This guy doesn’t pay much attention to punctuation.
"He hath rid his prologue like a rough colt. He knows not the stop. A good moral, my lord: it is not enough to speak, but to speak true.",He rode that prologue like a wild horse. He didn’t know how to stop it. The moral of this story is that it’s not enough to speak; you have to speak grammatically.
"Indeed he hath played on his prologue like a child on a recorder—a sound, but not in government.","Yes, he performed his prologue like a child plays a recorder—he can make sounds, but they’re out of control."
"His speech was like a tangled chain. Nothing impaired, but all disordered. Who is next?",His speech was like a tangled chain. It went on and on and was a total mess. Who’s next?
"(delivered by QUINCE) Gentles, perchance you wonder at this show. But wonder on, till truth make all things plain. This man is Pyramus, if you would know. This man, with lime and roughcast, doth present Wall, that vile wall which did these lovers sunder. And through Wall’s chink, poor souls, they are content To whisper. At the which let no man wonder. Presenteth Moonshine. For, if you will know, By moonshine did these lovers think no scorn To meet at Ninus' tomb—there, there to woo. This grisly beast, which “Lion” hight by name, Did scare away, or rather did affright. And, as she fled, her mantle she did fall, Which Lion vile with bloody mouth did stain. Anon comes Pyramus, sweet youth and tall, Whereat, with blade, with bloody blameful blade, He bravely broached his boiling bloody breast. And Thisbe, tarrying in mulberry shade, His dagger drew, and died. For all the rest, At large discourse, while here they do remain.","(delivered by QUINCE) Ladies and gentlemen, perhaps you are wondering what is going on. Well, keep wondering, until the truth makes everything clear. This man is Pyramus, if you want to know. This beautiful lady is definitely Thisbe. This man with the limestone and cement is portraying Wall, that horrible wall that kept these lovers apart. They are content to whisper through Wall’s little hole, the poor souls, and no one should be surprised. This man, with his lantern, dog, and thornbush, portrays Moonshine, because, if you want to know, the lovers were not ashamed to meet each other by moonshine at Ninus’s tomb in order to carry on their courtship. This grisly beast, which is called “Lion,” scared away, or rather frightened, the faithful Thisbe when she arrived at the meeting place at night. As she ran away from him, she dropped her cloak, which the horrible Lion stained with his bloody mouth. Soon Pyramus comes along, a tall and handsome young man, and finds his faithful Thisbe’s cloak to be dead. At this point, he takes his sword, his bloody blameful blade, and bravely breaks open his boiling bloody breast. And Thisbe, hiding in the shade of the mulberry bushes, took his dagger and killed herself. For the rest of the story, let Lion, Moonshine, Wall, and the two lovers talk more about it, since they’re standing here."
I wonder if the lion be to speak.,I wonder if the lion’s going to talk.
"No wonder, my lord. One lion may when many asses do.","It wouldn’t surprise me, my lord. If these asses can speak, a lion should be able to."
"(played by SNOUT) In this same interlude it doth befall And such a wall, as I would have you think, That had in it a crannied hole, or chink, Through which the lovers, Pyramus and Thisbe, Did whisper often very secretly. That I am that same wall. The truth is so. And this the cranny is, right and sinister, Through which the fearful lovers are to whisper.","(played by SNOUT) At this point I, Snout, play a wall. But not just any wall. I want you to understand that I’m pretending to be a kind of wall that has a little hole in it. The lovers Pyramus and Thisbe often whispered very secretly through that hole. This clay, this cement, and this stone that I’m carrying around show that I’m that wall. It’s the truth. And this is the crack, right side and left side (points with two fingers), through which the frightened lovers will be whispering."
Would you desire lime and hair to speak better?,Can you imagine cement and stone talking better?
"It is the wittiest partition that ever I heard discourse, my lord.","It’s the smartest partition I’ve ever heard speak, my lord."
Pyramus draws near the wall. Silence!,Pyramus is coming up to the wall. Be quiet!
"(played by BOTTOM) O grim-looked night! O night with hue so black! O night, O night! Alack, alack, alack,","(played by BOTTOM) Oh, grim-looking night! Oh, night that is so black in color! Oh night, which is always there when it is not day! Oh night! Oh night! So sad, sad, sad,"
"I fear my Thisbe’s promise is forgot!— And thou, O Wall, O sweet, O lovely Wall, That stand’st between her father’s ground and mine. Show me thy chink to blink through with mine eyne!","I’m afraid my Thisbe has forgotten her promise!—And you, oh Wall, oh sweet, oh lovely Wall, you stand between her father’s property and mine, you Wall, oh Wall, oh sweet and lovely Wall. Show me your hole to stick my eye up against!"
"Thanks, courteous Wall. Jove shield thee well for this! But what see I? No Thisbe do I see. O wicked Wall through whom I see no bliss!","Thank you, you’re such a polite wall. God bless you for doing this. 		 But what’s this I see? I don’t see any Thisbe. 		 Oh wicked wall, through which I don’t see any happiness! 		 Damn your stones for disappointing me like this!"
"The wall, methinks, being sensible, should curse again.","Since the wall is conscious, it should curse back at him."
"(out of character) No, in truth, sir, he should not. “Deceiving me” is Thisbe’s cue. She is to enter now and I am to spy her through the wall. You shall see, it will fall pat as I told you. Yonder she comes.","(out of character) No, actually, sir, he shouldn’t say anything. It’s not his turn, it’s Thisbe’s. “Disappointing me like this” is Thisbe’s cue. She’s supposed to enter now, and I’ll see her through the wall. You’ll see, it’ll happen exactly like I say. Here she comes."
"(played by FLUTE) O Wall, full often hast thou heard my moans, For parting my fair Pyramus and me! My cherry lips have often kissed thy stones,","(played by FLUTE) Oh wall, you’ve often heard me moaning because you keep me separated from my handsome Pyramus! My cherry lips have often kissed your bricks, which are stuck together with cement."
"I see a voice. Now will I to the chink, To spy an I can hear my Thisbe’s face. Thisbe?",I see a voice! I’ll go to the hole to see if I can hear my Thisbe’s face. Thisbe?
"My love thou art, my love, I think.","You are my love, my love, I think."
"Think what thou wilt, I am thy lover’s grace.","I’m your love, no matter what you think. And I’m still faithful to you, just like the famous Limander Bottom means the mythical Greek hero Leander. who loved Hero. Limander ."
"And I like Helen, till the Fates me kill.","And I’ll be as faithful to you as Helen of Troy This is funny not only because Leander loved Hero rather than Helen, but also because Helen was famous for being unfaithful to her husband. Helen of Troy , until the day I die."
Not Shafalus to Procrus was so true.,Not even Shafalus was as faithful to his lover Procrus as I am to you.
"As Shafalus to Procrus, I to you.","Me too, I’m as faithful as Shafalus to Procrus They mean to say Cephulus and Procris, two steadfast lovers in Greek mythology. Shafalus to Procrus ."
"Oh, kiss me through the hole of this vile wall!","Oh, kiss me through the hole in this nasty wall."
"I kiss the wall’s hole, not your lips at all.","But I’m only kissing the wall’s hole, not your lips at all."
Wilt thou at Ninny’s tomb meet me straightway?,Will you meet me right away at Ninny’s grave?
"Tide life, tide death, I come without delay.",Neither death nor life will stop me from coming.
"Thus have I, Wall, my part dischargèd so. And, being done, thus Wall away doth go.","I, Wall, have done my part. Now that I’m done, Wall can go away."
Now is the mural down between the two neighbors.,The lovers should’ve waited around a little longer—the wall between them is down now.
"No remedy, my lord, when walls are so willful to hear without warning.",What can you do? That’s what happens with talking walls.
This is the silliest stuff that ever I heard.,This is the silliest thing I’ve ever seen.
"The best in this kind are but shadows, and the worst are no worse if imagination amend them.","The best plays are still only illusions, and the worst are just as good, if you just use your imagination to fill them in."
"It must be your imagination then, and not theirs.","In that case it’s your imagination that’s interesting, not the play."
"If we imagine no worse of them than they of themselves, they may pass for excellent men. Here come two noble beasts in, a man and a lion.","If we imagine these guys as they imagine themselves, then they’re first-class actors. Look, here come two noble animals, a man and a lion."
"(played by SNUG) You, ladies, you whose gentle hearts do fear May now perchance both quake and tremble here, When lion rough in wildest rage doth roar. Then know that I, as Snug the joiner, am A lion fell, nor else no lion’s dam. Into this place, ’twere pity on my life.","(played by SNUG) You, ladies, whose gentle hearts make you afraid of the smallest monstrous mouse that crawls around on the floor, might quake and tremble now when the wild lion roars in his most violent rage. You should know that I, Snug the carpenter, am not a fierce lion or a lioness, because if I were a lion and I showed up here to cause trouble, I’d be taking my life in my hands."
"A very gentle beast, of a good conscience.","Ah, it’s a sensitive animal, with a good conscience."
"A very best at a beast, my lord, that e'er I saw.",He’s the best actor I’ve ever seen play a lion.
"This lion is a very fox, for his valor.",He’s as brave as a fox.
True. And a goose for his discretion.,True. And as wise as a goose.
"Not so, my lord. For his valor cannot carry his discretion, and the fox carries the goose.","Oh, that’s not true, my lord. He’s not brave enough to be wise."
"His discretion, I am sure, cannot carry his valor, for the goose carries not the fox. It is well. Leave it to his discretion, and let us listen to the moon.","He’s not wise enough to be brave. Anyway, he is what he is. Let’s listen to the moon."
(played by STARVELING) This lanthorn doth the hornèd moon present—,This lantern represents the horned moon horned moon = crescent moon horned moon —
He should have worn the horns on his head.,He should have worn the horns on his head. Cuckolds (husbands whose wives cheat on them) were imagined as having horns. horns on his head.
"He is no crescent, and his horns are invisible within the circumference.","He’s not a crescent moon, so his horns must be invisible inside the circle."
This lanthorn doth the hornèd moon present. Myself the man i' th' moon do seem to be—,This lantern represents the moon. I myself am playing the man in the moon—
This is the greatest error of all the rest. The man should be put into the lanthorn. How is it else the “man i' th' moon”?,"Well then, that’s the biggest mistake of all. The man should be inside the lantern. How else is he the “man in the moon”?"
"He dares not come there for the candle. For you see, it is already in snuff.",He can’t go in there because of the candle. It’s too hot.
I am aweary of this moon. Would he would change!,I’m tired of this moon. I wish he’d wax or wane off the stage.
"It appears by his small light of discretion, that he is in the wane. But yet, in courtesy, in all reason, we must stay the time.","It seems like he’s waning, but out of politeness we’ll have to wait and see."
"Proceed, Moon.","Go ahead, Moon."
"All that I have to say is to tell you that the lanthorn is the moon; I, the man in the moon; this thornbush, my thornbush; and this dog, my dog.","All I wanted to tell you is that the lantern is the moon, I’m the man in the moon, this thornbush is my thornbush, and this dog is my dog."
"Why, all these should be in the lanthorn, for all these are in the moon.—But silence! Here comes Thisbe.","Well, all of these should be in the lantern, because they’re all in the moon. But be quiet, here comes Thisbe."
This is old Ninny’s tomb. Where is my love?,This is old Ninny’s tomb. But where is my love?
(roaring) Oh!,(roaring) Hey!
"Well roared, Lion!","Good roaring, Lion!"
"Well run, Thisbe!","Good running, Thisbe!"
"Well shone, Moon!—Truly, the moon shines with a good grace.","Good shining, Moon!—Really, the Moon shines very well."
"Well moused, Lion!","That’s good, Lion! Shake it around like a cat with a mouse."
And then came Pyramus.,And then Pyramus showed up.
And so the lion vanished.,So the lion disappeared.
"I thank thee, Moon, for shining now so bright. For by thy gracious, golden, glittering gleams, I trust to take of truest Thisbe sight.— But stay, O spite! What dreadful dole is here! Eyes, do you see? How can it be? O dainty duck! O dear! What, stained with blood? Approach, ye Furies fell! O Fates, come, come, Cut thread and thrum.","Sweet Moon, I thank you for your sunny beams. I thank you, Moon, for shining now so bright, because by the light of your gracious, golden, glittering gleams, I hope to be able to see my faithful Thisbe.—But wait. Oh no! But, look, poor me, what a terrible tragedy is here! Eyes, do you see? How can it be? Oh, dainty duck! Oh, dear! Your cloak so good, what, stained with blood? Come, terrible Furies, and punish whoever has hurt her! Oh, Fate, come and cut the thread of my life. Conquer, crush, conclude, and kill!"
This passion and the death of a dear friend would go near to make a man look sad.,You could get sad watching this actor’s passionate lament—if one of your good friends happened to die right at the same time.
"Beshrew my heart, but I pity the man.",Damned if I don’t feel sorry for him.
"O wherefore, Nature, didst thou lions frame? Which is—no, no—which was the fairest dame That lived, that loved, that liked, that looked with cheer. Come, tears, confound! Out, sword, and wound!","Oh, Mother Nature, why did you create lions? A mean and awful lion has deflowered Bottom means “devoured,” since “deflowered” would mean that the lion had taken Thisbe’s virginity. deflowered my darling, who is—no, no, who was the most beautiful lady who ever lived, or loved, or liked, or looked. Come on, tears, pour over me! Come on out, sword, and wound Pyramus in the chest—yes, right here on the left side where his heart is. (PYRAMUS stabs himself)"
"Ay, that left pap Where heart doth hop. (stabs himself)  Thus die I, thus, thus, thus. Now am I fled. My soul is in the sky. Tongue, lose thy light. Moon, take thy flight.","And so I’m dying. Here I go, here I go. Okay, now I’m dead. My soul has fled to the sky. My tongue shall see no more, It’s time for the moon to go away."
(dies),"Now die, die, die, die, die. (PYRAMUS dies)"
"No die, but an ace for him, for he is but one.","Is someone throwing dice? I guess it’s “die,” not dice, since there’s only one of him."
"Less than an ace, man. For he is dead. He is nothing.","Actually he’s a die with no dots, since he’s nothing—he’s dead."
With the help of a surgeon he might yet recover and prove an ass.,With a doctor’s help he might recover and become an ass again.
How chance Moonshine is gone before Thisbe comes back and finds her lover?,"If Moonshine’s gone before Thisbe comes back, how will she be able to see in the dark to find her lover dead?"
"She will find him by starlight. Here she comes, and her passion ends the play.",She’ll see him by starlight. Here she comes. Her moaning and groaning will end the play.
I hope she will be brief.,I don’t think a ridiculous Pyramus like that one deserves much moaning. I hope she keeps it short.
"A mote will turn the balance, which Pyramus, which Thisbe, is the better. He for a man, God warrant us, she for a woman, God bless us.",I can’t decide whether Pyramus or Thisbe is better. God help us if he’s a better man. But God help us if she’s a better woman.
She hath spied him already with those sweet eyes.,"Look, she’s spotted him with those sweet eyes of hers."
"And thus she means, videlicet—","And now she’ll start moaning, of course—"
"Asleep, my love? What, dead, my dove? O Pyramus, arise! Dead, dead? A tomb Must cover thy sweet eyes. These lily lips, This cherry nose, Are gone, are gone. Lovers, make moan. His eyes were green as leeks. O Sisters three, With hands as pale as milk. Lay them in gore, Since you have shore With shears his thread of silk. Come, trusty sword. Come, blade, my breast imbrue.(stabs herself) And, farewell, friends. Thus Thisbe ends. (dies)","Are you asleep, my love? What, are you dead, my dove? Oh, Pyramus, get up! Speak, speak. Can’t you talk? Dead, dead? The dirt of a grave must cover your sweet eyes! Your lily-white lips, your cherry-red nose, and your buttercup-yellow cheeks are gone, gone forever. Lovers, moan and weep. His eyes were as green as leeks. Oh, Fate, come, come to me, with hands as pale as milk. Soak your hands in blood and gore, since you have cut the thread of his life with scissors. Tongue, do not speak. Come, trusty sword. Come, blade, drench my breast with blood. (she stabs herself) Goodbye, friends! This is how Thisbe comes to an end. Goodbye, goodbye, goodbye. (THISBE dies)"
Moonshine and Lion are left to bury the dead.,Moonshine and Lion are left to bury the dead.
"Ay, and Wall too.","Yes, and Wall too."
"(out of character) No, assure you. The wall is down that parted their fathers. Will it please you to see the epilogue, or to hear a Bergomask dance between two of our company?","(out of character) No, I assure you. The wall that kept their fathers apart has been taken down. Would you like to see the epilogue or hear a country dance between two of us?"
"No epilogue, I pray you, for your play needs no excuse. Never excuse—for when the players are all dead, there needs none to be blamed. Marry, if he that writ it had played Pyramus and hanged himself in Thisbe’s garter, it would have been a fine tragedy. And so it is, truly, and very notably discharged. But come, your Bergomask. Let your epilogue alone.","No epilogue, please. Your play doesn’t need to be excused afterward with an epilogue. Never apologize—when the actors are all dead, no one can be blamed. As a matter of fact, if the playwright had played Pyramus and hanged himself with Thisbe’s belt, it would have been a very good tragedy. It’s a good tragedy, very well done. But come on, let’s see you do your dance. Forget your epilogue."
"The iron tongue of midnight hath told twelve. Lovers, to bed. 'Tis almost fairy time. As much as we this night have overwatched. This palpable-gross play hath well beguiled The heavy gait of night. Sweet friends, to bed. A fortnight hold we this solemnity,","The clock has chimed midnight. Lovers, it’s time to go to bed. It’s almost fairy time. I’m afraid we’re going to oversleep in the morning as late as we’ve stayed up tonight.This blatantly stupid play helped us kill the time until bed. Dear friends, let’s go to bed. We’ll continue this celebration for two weeks, with nightly parties and new fun."
"Now the hungry lion roars And the wolf behowls the moon, Whilst the heavy ploughman snores, All with weary task fordone. Now the wasted brands do glow, Whilst the screech-owl, screeching loud, Puts the wretch that lies in woe In remembrance of a shroud. Now it is the time of night That the graves all gaping wide, Every one lets forth his sprite, In the churchway paths to glide.","Now the hungry lion roars and the wolf howls at the moon. The farmer snores, exhausted from his work. The charred logs glow in the fireplace, and the owl’s hoot makes the sick man think about his own death. Now is the time of night when graves open wide and release spirits to glide over the graveyard paths."
"And we fairies, that do run By the triple Hecate’s team From the presence of the sun, Following darkness like a dream, Now are frolic. Not a mouse Shall disturb this hallowed house. I am sent with broom before To sweep the dust behind the door.","And we fairies, who run away from the sun just like the goddess of the night, following darkness like a dream, are getting antsy. But I’m here to make sure that not even a mouse disturbs this blessed house. I’ve been sent to clean house a bit before the fairies come."
"Through the house give glimmering light, By the dead and drowsy fire. Every elf and fairy sprite Hop as light as bird from brier. Sing and dance it trippingly.","Let the dying fire shine a glimmering light throughout the house. I want every elf and fairy to hop lightly, like a bird on a twig, and to sing and dance this song along with me."
"First, rehearse your song by rote, To each word a warbling note. Hand in hand with fairy grace","First rehearse your song from memory, and make sure each note is pretty. We’ll all join hands and sing, and bless this place with our fairy grace."
"(sings) Now until the break of day, Through this house each fairy stray. To the best bride bed will we, Which by us shall blessèd be. And the issue there create Ever shall be fortunate. So shall all the couples three Ever true in loving be. And the blots of Nature’s hand Shall not in their issue stand.","(singing) Now, until morning, each fairy should walk through this house. Titania and I will go to the royal marriage bed to bless it, and the children conceived in that bed will always have good luck. Each of the three couples will always be faithful and in love, and their children will have no deformities."
"Never mole, harelip, nor scar, Nor mark prodigious, such as are Despisèd in nativity, Shall upon their children be. With this field dew consecrate, Every fairy take his gait. And each several chamber bless Through this palace with sweet peace. And the owner of it blessed Ever shall in safety rest. Trip away. Make no stay. Meet me all by break of day.","They won’t have moles, or harelips, or scars, or abnormal markings, or anything else that might alarm someone if their baby was born with it. Use this blessed dew from the fields to bless each room in the palace with sweet peace. And the blessed owner will always be safe. Run along. Don’t stay long. Meet me at dawn."
"If we shadows have offended, Think but this, and all is mended— That you have but slumbered here While these visions did appear. And this weak and idle theme, No more yielding but a dream, Gentles, do not reprehend. If you pardon, we will mend. And, as I am an honest Puck, If we have unearnèd luck Now to ’scape the serpent’s tongue, We will make amends ere long. Else the Puck a liar call. So good night unto you all. Give me your hands if we be friends, And Robin shall restore amends.","If we actors have offended you, just think of it this way and everything will be all right—you were asleep when you saw these visions, and this silly and pathetic story was no more real than a dream. Ladies and gentlemen, don’t get upset with me. If you forgive us, we’ll make everything all right. I’m an honest Puck, and I swear that if we’re lucky enough not to get hissed at, we’ll make it up to you soon. If not, then I’m a liar. So good night to everyone. Give me some applause, if we’re friends, and Robin will make everything up to you."
