I learn in this letter that Don Pedro of Aragon comes this night to Messina.,"(holding a letter) According to this letter, Don “Don” is the Italian equivalent of “Sir” or “Lord.” Don Pedro of Aragon and his army are coming to Messina tonight."
He is very near by this. He was not three leagues off when I left him.,"He must be very near by now. When I left him, he was less than nine miles from here."
How many gentlemen have you lost in this action?,How many noblemen were killed in the battle you just fought?
"But few of any sort, and none of name.","Not many, and no one important."
A victory is twice itself when the achiever brings home full numbers. I find here that Don Pedro hath bestowed much honor on a young Florentine called Claudio.,A victory in battle is twice as victorious when all the soldiers return home safely. This letter also says that Don Pedro has given honors to a young man from Florence named Claudio.
"Don Pedro. He hath borne himself beyond the promise of his age, doing in the figure of a lamb the feats of a lion. He hath indeed better bettered expectation than you must expect of me to tell you how.","Claudio deserves to be honored, and Don Pedro has rewarded him accordingly. Claudio has done more than anyone would expect of a man his age. He looks like a lamb but fights like a lion. He has so greatly exceeded all expectations that I can’t even describe all he’s done."
it.,He has an uncle here in Messina who will be glad to hear this news.
"I have already delivered him letters, and there appears much joy in him—even so much that joy could not show itself modest enough without a badge of bitterness.","I have delivered some letters to his uncle, and he seemed very happy. He got so emotional that he actually looked like he was in pain."
Did he break out into tears?,Did he start weeping?
In great measure.,"Yes, heavily."
A kind overflow of kindness. There are no faces truer than those that are so washed. How much better is it to weep at joy than to joy at weeping!,That’s a very natural display of affection. There’s no face more sincere than one washed in tears. And it’s definitely better to cry because you’re happy than laugh because you’re sad!
no?,"Please tell me, has Signior Montanto “Montanto” is a fencing term for an upward thrust. Montanto returned from battle?"
"I know none of that name, lady. There was none such in the army of any sort.","I don’t know anyone with that name, ma'am. There was no Signior Montanto in our army."
"What is he that you ask for, niece?","Who are you talking about, niece?"
My cousin means Signor Benedick of Padua.,My cousin means Signior Benedick of Padua.
"Oh, he’s returned, and as pleasant as ever he was.","Oh, yes, Benedick has returned and is as cheerful as ever."
"He set up his bills here in Messina and challenged Cupid at the flight, and my uncle’s Fool, reading the challenge, subscribed for Cupid and challenged him at the bird-bolt. wars? But how many hath he killed? For indeed I promised to eat all of his killing.","Benedick The exact meaning of this story is unclear, but it depicts Benedick as a braggart and a fool. Benedick once put up a public notice in Messina challenging Cupid to an archery match. My uncle’s jester accepted the contest on Cupid’s behalf but used toy arrows at the shooting match. But tell me, how many men did he kill and eat in this battle? I promised him I would eat anyone he killed."
"Faith, niece, you tax Signor Benedick too much, but he’ll be meet with you, I doubt it not.","For God’s sake, Beatrice, you’re criticizing Signior Benedick too heavily. But I’m sure he’ll get even with you."
"He hath done good service, lady, in these wars.","Signior Benedick served well in the war, my lady."
"You had musty victual, and he hath holp to eat it. He is a very valiant trencherman. He hath an excellent stomach.","You had rotten food, and he helped you eat it. He’s a very brave eater—he has a strong stomach."
"And a good soldier too, lady.","He’s a good soldier too, lady."
"And a good soldier to a lady, but what is he to a lord?","He’s a good soldier to a lady? Well then, what is he to a lord?"
virtues.,He’s a lord to a lord and a man to a man. He is positively stuffed with honorable virtues.
"It is so indeed. He is no less than a stuffed man. But for the stuffing—well, we are all mortal.","Absolutely—he is stuffed, like a dummy. As for what he’s stuffed with—well, nobody’s perfect."
"You must not, sir, mistake my niece. There is a kind of meet but there’s a skirmish of wit between them.","Please don’t take my niece the wrong way, sir. Benedick and Beatrice have been waging a war of wits between themselves. Whenever they meet, there’s a little battle."
"Alas, he gets nothing by that. In our last conflict four of his five wits went halting off, and now is the whole man governed with one, so that if he have wit enough to keep himself and his horse, for it is all the wealth that he hath left to be known a reasonable creature. Who is his companion now? He hath every month a new sworn brother.","And I always win. The last time we fought, he was so dazed by the end that he wasn’t much smarter than his horse. So tell me, who is he hanging around with these days? Every month he has a new best friend."
Is ’t possible?,Is that possible?
his hat; it ever changes with the next block.,It’s entirely possible. He’s incredibly fickle—his affection changes faster than the latest fashions.
"I see, lady, the gentleman is not in your books.",I can see you don’t like this gentleman.
"No. An he were, I would burn my study. But I pray you, who is his companion? Is there no young squarer now that","No, absolutely not. But please tell me, who’s his best friend? Isn’t there some new swaggering young ruffian who will happily go to hell with Benedick?"
He is most in the company of the right noble Claudio.,"He spends most of his time with the good, noble Claudio."
"O Lord, he will hang upon him like a disease! He is sooner caught than the pestilence, and the taker runs presently mad. God help the noble Claudio! If he have caught the","Oh God, Benedick will plague him like a disease! Benedick is an infection that’s easy to catch but hard to get rid of—and he’ll drive you crazy once you’ve been infected. God help Claudio! If he’s caught the Benedick, he’ll lose all his money before he’s cured."
"I will hold friends with you, lady.","I’m going to make sure I stay on your good side, lady."
"Do, good friend.","Do that, my friend."
"You will never run mad, niece.","You will never fall victim to Benedick’s charms, my niece."
"No, not till a hot January.","No, not until we see a hot January."
Don Pedro is approached.,Don Pedro is here.
"Good Signor Leonato, are you come to meet your trouble? The fashion of the world is to avoid cost, and you encounter it.","My dear Signior Leonato, hosting my whole army is such a huge burden, but you accept it—and me—with open arms. Most people choose to avoid trouble, but you run to it."
"Never came trouble to my house in the likeness of your when you depart from me, sorrow abides and happiness takes his leave.","You are never trouble to this house, your Grace. It’s comforting when trouble departs. But when you leave, you take happiness with you and leave sorrow in its place."
You embrace your charge too willingly. I think this is your daughter.,You take up your duties too cheerfully. (turning to HERO) This must be your daughter.
Her mother hath many times told me so.,That’s what her mother always tells me.
"Were you in doubt, sir, that you asked her?","Did you doubt that she was your daughter, since you had to ask her mother?"
"Signor Benedick, no, for then were you a child.","(teasing) Of course not, Signior Benedick. You were only a child when my daughter was born, and not yet old enough to seduce my wife."
"You have it full, Benedick. We may guess by this what you are, being a man. Truly, the lady fathers herself.—Be","Ah, he got you back, Benedick! Leonato clearly knows your reputation with women. Seriously, though, the lady resembles Leonato so much that there can be no doubt about who her father is. Congratulations, lady: you resemble a most honorable man."
"If Signor Leonato be her father, she would not have his head on her shoulders for all Messina, as like him as she is.","Well, even if he is her father, I’m sure she wouldn’t want to have the head of the old man on her shoulders!"
"I wonder that you will still be talking, Signor Benedick. Nobody marks you.","I’m amazed you’re still talking, Signior Benedick. No one’s listening to you."
"What, my dear Lady Disdain! Are you yet living?","Look, it’s my dear Lady Disdain! Aren’t you dead yet?"
Is it possible disdain should die while she hath such meet food to feed it as Signor Benedick? Courtesy itself must convert to disdain if you come in her presence.,"How could disdain die when you’re here? When you’re around, even Lady Courtesy becomes Lady Disdain."
"Then is courtesy a turncoat. But it is certain I am loved of my heart that I had not a hard heart, for truly I love none.","That makes Lady Courtesy a traitor. All ladies love me, except you. It’s too bad I’m so hard-hearted, because I really don’t love anyone."
A dear happiness to women. They would else have been troubled with a pernicious suitor. I thank God and my cold blood I am of your humor for that. I had rather hear my dog,"Women are lucky, then. You would make a nasty suitor. Thankfully, I feel the same way you do. I have no need for romance. I would rather listen to my dog bark at a crow than hear a man swear that he loves me."
"God keep your Ladyship still in that mind, so some gentle- man or other shall ’scape a predestinate scratched face.","Well, I hope you stay in that frame of mind or some poor man will end up with his face all scratched up."
Scratching could not make it worse an ’twere such a face as yours were.,"If he has a face like yours, a good scratching couldn’t make him look any worse."
"Well, you are a rare parrot-teacher.","Listen to you, instructing me like a parrot would."
A bird of my tongue is better than a beast of yours.,I’d rather be a squawking bird than an animal like you.
"I would my horse had the speed of your tongue and so good a continuer. But keep your way, i' God’s name. I have done.",I wish my horse moved as fast as your mouth and was as tireless. That’s it—I’m done.
You always end with a jade’s trick. I know you of old.,You always slip out of the argument like this. I know you from before.
"Signior Benedick, my dear friend Leonato hath invited you all. I tell him we shall stay here at the least a month, and he heartily prays some occasion may detain us longer. I dare swear he is no hypocrite but prays from his heart.","And that’s everything, Leonato.—Claudio, Benedick—my dear friend Leonato has invited you all to stay here at Messina. I told him we’ll stay for at least a month, and he says that he hopes we’ll stay longer. I think he’s actually serious, and not just being polite."
"JOHN) Let me bid you welcome, my lord. Being reconciled to the Prince your brother, I owe you all duty.","I am being serious, my lord. (to DON JOHN) I welcome you here as well. Now that you and your brother have made friends again, I owe you the same allegiance I owe Don Pedro."
"I thank you. I am not of many words, but I thank you.","Thank you. I’m not a man who talks a lot, but I thank you."
Please it your Grace lead on?,"If it pleases you, your highness, will you lead us all inside?"
"Your hand, Leonato. We will go together.","Give me your hand, Leonato. We will go in together."
"Benedick, didst thou note the daughter of Signior Leonato?","Benedick, did you notice Signior Leonato’s daughter?"
"I noted her not, but I looked on her.","I saw her, but I didn’t notice her."
Is she not a modest young lady?,Isn’t she a well-mannered young lady?
"Do you question me as an honest man should do, for my my custom, as being a professed tyrant to their sex?",Do you want my true opinion? Or do you want me to criticize her like I do all women?
"No, I pray thee speak in sober judgment.","No, please, speak seriously."
"Why, i' faith, methinks she’s too low for a high praise, too brown for a fair praise, and too little for a great praise. Only than she is, she were unhandsome, and being no other but as she is, I do not like her.","Well, it seems to me that she is too short to be praised highly, too dark to be praised fairly, and too small to be praised greatly. I can only say this about her: if she looked different than she does, she would be ugly, and since she can’t be anything but herself, I don’t like her."
Thou thinkest I am in sport. I pray thee tell me truly how thou lik’st her.,You think I’m kidding. Please tell me seriously what you think of her.
"Would you buy her, that you enquire after her?",Are you thinking of buying her? Is that why you’re asking?
Can the world buy such a jewel?,Would it even be possible to buy a jewel as rare and precious as Hero?
"Yea, and a case to put it into. But speak you this with a sad brow? Or do you play the flouting jack, to tell us Cupid is a good hare-finder and Vulcan a rare carpenter? Come, in","Yes, and you could buy a case to put it in, too. But tell me, are you speaking seriously? Or are you just teasing? If I’m going to sing along with you, I need to know what key you’re singing in."
In mine eye she is the sweetest lady that ever I looked on.,I think she’s the most wonderful woman I’ve ever laid eyes on.
"I can see yet without spectacles, and I see no such matter. There’s her cousin, an she were not possessed with a fury, exceeds her as much in beauty as the first of May doth the husband, have you?","I’m still young enough to see without glasses, and I don’t see what you’re talking about. If her cousin Beatrice didn’t have such a nasty temper, she’d be so much more beautiful than Hero that it would be like comparing May to December. But, hey, this doesn’t mean you’re looking to get married, does it?"
"I would scarce trust myself, though I had sworn the contrary, if Hero would be my wife.","Even if I had sworn never to marry, I wouldn’t trust myself to keep that promise if Hero would marry me."
"Is ’t come to this? In faith, hath not the world one man but bachelor of three-score again? Go to, i' faith, an thou wilt needs thrust thy neck into a yoke, wear the print of it, and sigh away Sundays. Look, Don Pedro is returned to seek you.","What’s going on these days? Isn’t there one man left in the world who knows not to take a wife? She’s just going to cheat on him. Will I never see a sixty-year old bachelor again or will all men be swindled into marriage while they’re young? Go ahead, then, if you have to yoke yourself to marriage, like an ox carrying his load, and throw away your free time. Look, Don Pedro has come back for you."
Leonato’s?,What secrets between you have kept you from following us to Leonato’s?
I would your grace would constrain me to tell.,Your highness will have to force me to tell.
I charge thee on thy allegiance.,Your loyalty to me requires you to tell me what you’ve been talking about.
"You hear, Count Claudio? I can be secret as a dumb man, I this, on my allegiance—(to DON PEDRO) he is in love. With who? Now, that is your Grace’s part. Mark how short his answer is: with Hero, Leonato’s short daughter.","Look, Claudio, I can keep secrets like a mute; I want you to know that. But I owe Don Pedro my allegiance—look, I have to tell him—(to DON PEDRO) Claudio is in love. With whom? That’s what you’re supposed to ask me next, your Grace. Look how short the answer is—with Hero, Leonato’s short daughter."
"If this were so, so were it uttered.",If you say so.
"indeed, God forbid it should be so.”","Listen to him deny it, like that man in the old tale “Mr. Fox”: “It isn’t true and wasn’t true and God forbid it should be so.”"
"If my passion change not shortly, God forbid it should be otherwise.","Unless my feelings change very soon, I have to admit it’s true."
"Amen, if you love her, for the lady is very well worthy.","It’s good if you love Hero, because she’s worthy of your love."
"You speak this to fetch me in, my lord.","You’re trying to trick me, my lord."
"By my troth, I speak my thought.","I swear, I’m telling you what I honestly think."
"And, in faith, my lord, I spoke mine.",And I swear I spoke honestly to Benedick—I am in love with Hero.
"And by my two faiths and troths, my lord, I spoke mine.",And I swear all up and down I spoke honestly when I said that this was a horrible idea.
"That I love her, I feel.",I feel that I love her.
"That she is worthy, I know.",I know that she is worthy of that love.
That I neither feel how she should be loved nor know how she should be worthy is the opinion that fire cannot melt out of me. I will die in it at the stake.,"I, on the other hand, don’t feel how she could be loved and don’t know how she could be worthy. Even fire can’t melt that opinion out of me. You could burn me at the stake, and I’d still think this."
Thou wast ever an obstinate heretic in the despite of beauty.,You never did believe in the power of beauty.
And never could maintain his part but in the force of his will.,Or in the power of reason.
"That a woman conceived me, I thank her. That she brought me up, I likewise give her most humble thanks. But that I will have a recheat winded in my forehead or hang my bugle Because I will not do them the wrong to mistrust any, I will do myself the right to trust none. And the fine is, for the which I may go the finer, I will live a bachelor.","I was conceived by a woman, and I thank her very much for all her effort. And then she brought me up, and I thank her for that, too. But all the other women will have to forgive me for not being willing to be made a fool of—cheated on by a wife. I don’t want to insult any particular woman by doubting and mistrusting her, so I’ll just avoid them all. And the conclusion of this is that I’ll live as a bachelor—and, with the money I save, dress better."
"I shall see thee, ere I die, look pale with love.","I swear, before I die I’m going to see you sick with love."
"with love. Prove that ever I lose more blood with love than I will get again with drinking, pick out mine eyes with a ballad-maker’s pen and hang me up at the door of a brothel house for the sign of blind Cupid.","With anger, with fever, or with hunger, sure, my friend, but never sick with love. If you can prove that I’ll ever be so in love that I can’t be brought to my senses with a good round of beers, you can pluck out my eyes with a love-poet’s pen and hang me on a brothel’s door where the picture of blind Cupid usually goes."
a notable argument.,"I’ll be sure to remember this fuss you’ve made, in case you ever do fall in love. That’ll be news."
"If I do, hang me in a bottle like a cat and shoot at me, and he that hits me, let him be clapped on the shoulder and called Adam.","If I ever change my mind, you can use me for target practice. And whoever hits the bull’s eye gets to be a hero."
In time the savage bull doth bear the yoke.,"Well, time will tell. Even the most savage bull is eventually domesticated."
"The savage bull may, but if ever the sensible Benedick bear it, pluck off the bull’s horns and set them in my forehead, and let me be vilely painted, and in such great letters as they sign “Here you may see Benedick the married man.”","Maybe the bull is, but if I am ever domesticated, you can take that bull’s horns and put them right on my forehead, as my wife is sure to cuckold me soon enough. You might as well hang a big sign with enormous lettering around my neck. But instead of it saying “Horse for hire,” it will say “Take a look at Benedick, the married man.”"
"If this should ever happen, thou wouldst be horn-mad.","If that ever happened, you’d go absolutely mad."
"Nay, if Cupid have not spent all his quiver in Venice, thou wilt quake for this shortly.","Well, if Cupid hasn’t used up all his arrows in Venice, where the courtesans are famous for making men lovesick, he’ll get you to quiver and shake. Just you wait."
"I look for an earthquake too, then.",That’s about as likely as an earthquake.
"Well, you temporize with the hours. In the meantime, good Signior Benedick, repair to Leonato’s. Commend me to him and tell him I will not fail him at supper, for indeed he hath made great preparation.","Oh, you’ll soften as time passes. While you’re waiting for that to happen, though, hurry to Leonato’s. Give him my respects, and tell him I’ll definitely be there for dinner, since I know he has gone to great lengths for this meal."
and so I commit you—,I think I can handle this mission. And so I commit you—
"To the tuition of God. From my house, if I had it—","“Into God’s hands. From my house, if I had a house—”"
"The sixth of July. Your loving friend, Benedick.","“The sixth of July. Sincerely, your loving friend, Benedick.”"
"Nay, mock not, mock not. The body of your discourse is slightly basted on neither. Ere you flout old ends any further, examine your conscience. And so I leave you.","Oh, stop joking around. You know, sometimes you two dress up your conversation with flimsy little bits of wit that don’t hold together too well. Before you make fun Benedick and Claudio are making fun of the fact that “I commit you” is, in Shakespeare’s time, a common way to end a formal letter. fun of everyone else, look at yourselves in the mirror! And with that, I’m leaving."
"My liege, your highness now may do me good.","My lord, you could really help me out now."
"My love is thine to teach. Teach it but how, Any hard lesson that may do thee good.","I am at your service. Just tell me what you want me to do, and however hard it is, you’ll see that I’m eager to do it."
"Hath Leonato any son, my lord?","Does Leonato have a son, my lord?"
"No child but Hero; she’s his only heir. Dost thou affect her, Claudio?","Hero is his only child, and his only heir. Do you like her, Claudio?"
"O, my lord, I looked upon her with a soldier’s eye, That liked but had a rougher task in hand Than to drive liking to the name of love. But now I am returned and that war thoughts Come thronging soft and delicate desires, All prompting me how fair young Hero is, Saying I liked her ere I went to wars.","Oh, my lord, when we left Messina to fight the war, I looked at Hero with the eyes of a soldier. I liked what I saw, but my mind was so occupied with the rough, violent task ahead of me that there was no chance that like would turn intolove. But now that I’m back, the room in my head that I used to fill with war plans has become crowded with soft and delicate feelings. They all lead me to the same thought—how beautiful young Hero is and how I must have liked her even before I left to fight."
"Thou wilt be like a lover presently If thou dost love fair Hero, cherish it, And I will break with her and with her father, And thou shalt have her. Was ’t not to this end That thou began’st to twist so fine a story?","You will become a true lover soon, and exhaust your friends with your endless chatter about your feelings. Look, if you really love the beautiful Hero, enjoy it. I will speak to her and her father about the matter, and I’ll convince Leonato to promise Hero to you. Isn’t that the reason you told me all this?"
"That know love’s grief by his complexion! But lest my liking might too sudden seem, I would have salved it with a longer treatise.","You can see that I’m sick with love, and you’re taking care of me in just the right way! But I didn’t want you to think that I’m hasty in my emotions. I was going to explain my feelings with a longer story."
"What need the bridge much broader than the flood? Look what will serve is fit. 'Tis once, thou lovest, And I will fit thee with the remedy. I know we shall have reveling tonight. I will assume thy part in some disguise And in her bosom I’ll unclasp my heart And take her hearing prisoner with the force And strong encounter of my amorous tale. Then after to her father will I break, In practice let us put it presently.","Why speak longer than you have to? That’s like building a bridge wider than the river it crosses. Whatever gets the job done is best. You love Hero; that’s all I need to know to want to find a remedy. They’re going to have a costume party with dancing tonight. I’ll disguise myself as you and pour out “my” feelings to Hero, taking her prisoner with the force of my love story. Then I’ll talk to her father. And in the end, she’s yours! Let’s get started right away."
"How now, brother, where is my cousin, your son? Hath he provided this music?","Hey, brother. Tell me, where is my nephew, your son? Has he taken care of the music?"
"He is very busy about it. But, brother, I can tell you strange news that you yet dreamt not of.","He is taking care of it as we speak. But brother, I have some strange news for you."
Are they good?,Is it good news?
"As the events stamps them, but they have a good cover; they show well outward. The Prince and Count Claudio, walking in a thick-pleached alley in mine orchard, were thus much overheard by a man of mine: the Prince and meant to acknowledge it this night in a dance, and if he found her accordant, he meant to take the present time by the top and instantly break with you of it.","Well, it seems like good news. A servant of mine overheard the Prince and Claudio talking as they walked through my orchard. The Prince said that he is in love with Hero, your daughter, and that he is going to tell her so at the dance tonight. If he she wants to marry him, too, he’s going to find you and ask for her hand immediately."
Hath the fellow any wit that told you this?,Is this servant of yours a smart man?
yourself.,"He’s very bright. I’ll get him to come here, and you can ask him yourself."
"No, no, we will hold it as a dream till it appear itself. But I will acquaint my daughter withal, that she may be the better prepared for an answer if peradventure this be true.","No, no, until it comes true we’ll pretend it was just a dream we had. But my daughter should know about this, so she can be prepared with an answer just in case. Go to her and tell her for me."
"Cousins, you know what you have to do.—O, I cry you mercy, friend. Go you with me and I will use your skill.— Good cousin, have a care this busy time.","Cousins, you all have work to do.—Oh, I beg your pardon. Come with me now, and help me out. —Dear cousin, please be careful during this busy time."
"What the goodyear, my lord, why are you thus out of measure sad?","Really, my lord, why are you so excessively sad?"
There is no measure in the occasion that breeds. Therefore the sadness is without limit.,The things that cause my sadness are without limit. Therefore my sadness is without limit.
You should hear reason.,You should listen to reason. Then you’d stop being so gloomy.
"And when I have heard it, what blessing brings it?","And after I have sat and listened to reason, what’s my prize?"
"If not a present remedy, at least a patient sufferance.","If not an end to your suffering, then at least you’ll have the means to endure it patiently."
"I wonder that thou, being, as thou sayst thou art, born under Saturn, goest about to apply a moral medicine to a when I have cause and smile at no man’s jests, eat when I have stomach and wait for no man’s leisure, sleep when I am drowsy and tend on no man’s business, laugh when I am merry and claw no man in his humor.",I’m amazed that you—being such a moody man yourself—are moralizing about my deadly condition. I can’t hide what I am. I’ll be sad when I have reason to be sad and won’t smile at anybody’s jokes. I’ll eat when I’m hungry and won’t wait until it’s convenient. I’ll sleep when I’m tired and won’t rouse myself for anything. I’ll laugh when I’m happy and won’t flatter and fawn over anyone.
"may do it without controlment. You have of late stood out against your brother, and he hath ta'en you newly into his grace, where it is impossible you should take true root but by the fair weather that you make yourself. It is needful that","Sure, but don’t do it at full volume until there’s no danger in it. Not long ago you challenged and opposed your brother, and it is only very recently that he has forgiven you. You need to act carefully if you’re going to stay in his good graces. You have to wait for the appropriate time to let loose."
"I had rather be a canker in a hedge than a rose in his grace, and it better fits my blood to be disdained of all than to fashion a carriage to rob love from any. In this, though I cannot be said to be a flattering honest man, it must not be muzzle and enfranchised with a clog; therefore I have decreed not to sing in my cage. If I had my mouth, I would bite; if I had my liberty, I would do my liking. In the meantime, let me be that I am, and seek not to alter me.","I’d rather be a weed in a hedge than a rose in my brother’s garden. It suits me more to be hated by everyone than to put on a fancy show and trick people into loving me. Though I am not a flattering, righteous man, at least you can say that I am honest about being a villain. My brother trusts me now? Yeah—as much as a master trusts the dog he muzzles or the peasant he “frees” by chaining a big block around the man’s foot. If my mouth were unrestrained, I’d bite. If I were free, I’d do what I pleased. Until that happens, let me be who I am and don’t try to change me."
Can you make no use of your discontent?,Can’t you somehow use your dissatisfaction to your own advantage?
"I make all use of it, for I use it only. Who comes here?","I use it all the time, since it’s all that I have. Who’s that?"
"What news, Borachio?","What’s going on, Borachio?"
I came yonder from a great supper. The Prince your brother intelligence of an intended marriage.,"I just came from a great feast where Leonato is entertaining the Prince, your brother. I can give you information about an intended marriage."
Will it serve for any model to build mischief on? What is he for a fool that betroths himself to unquietness?,Will this give me an opportunity to make some mischief? Who is this fool who wants all the fuss of marriage?
"Marry, it is your brother’s right hand.",Your brother’s right-hand man.
Who? The most exquisite Claudio?,"Who? That pretty boy, Claudio?"
Even he.,That’s the one.
"A proper squire. And who, and who? Which way looks he?",He’s a very fancy gentleman. And who’s the girl who has caught his eye?
"Marry, on Hero, the daughter and heir of Leonato.","Hero, the daughter and heir of Leonato."
A very forward March-chick! How came you to this?,A lively young one! How did you learn about this?
"room, comes me the Prince and Claudio, hand in hand, in sad conference. I whipped me behind the arras, and there heard it agreed upon that the Prince should woo Hero for himself, and having obtained her, give her to Count","I was hired to perfume all the rooms in Leonato’s house. As I was working on one musty room, the Prince and Claudio entered. They were in the middle of a serious conversation. I quickly hid behind a tapestry and heard them agree that the Prince would court Hero tonight at the dance and, once he won her consent to marry, would give her to Claudio."
"Come, come, let us thither. This may prove food to my displeasure. That young start-up hath all the glory of my overthrow. If I can cross him any way, I bless myself every way. You are both sure, and will assist me?","Come, let’s go to the dance. This just may cheer me up. Claudio, the young upstart, was responsible for keeping me from gaining power over my brother. If there’s any way I can spoil his life, I’ll be overjoyed. You’ll both help me, right?"
"To the death, my lord.","Until the day we die, my lord."
Let us to the great supper. Their cheer is the greater that I am subdued. Would the cook were o' my mind! Shall we go prove what’s to be done?,Let’s go to this great feast. They’ll be even happier now that my mood has lightened. It’s too bad the cook doesn’t think like me; she would have poisoned them all if she did. Should we go check out the scene?
We’ll wait upon your lordship.,"Lead the way, sir."
Was not Count John here at supper?,Wasn’t Don John at dinner tonight?
I saw him not.,I didn’t see him.
How tartly that gentleman looks! I never can see him but I am heartburned an hour after.,That man always looks so sour! Just looking at him gives me heartburn.
He is of a very melancholy disposition.,He has a very gloomy attitude.
"He were an excellent man that were made just in the midway between him and Benedick. The one is too like an image and says nothing, and the other too like my lady’s eldest son, evermore tattling.","It would be excellent if they could make a man halfway between Don John and Benedick. One of them is too much like a painting of a man—he never speaks—and the other is too much like a spoiled little boy, always chattering."
"mouth, and half Count John’s melancholy in Signor Benedick’s face—","So, the man would talk half as much as Benedick and be half as serious as Don John—"
"With a good leg and a good foot, uncle, and money enough in his purse, such a man would win any woman in the","And if he were handsome, agile, and rich, too, he could have any woman in the world—all he’d need was her good will."
"By my troth, niece, thou wilt never get thee a husband if thou be so shrewd of thy tongue.","Really, niece, you’ll never get a husband if you keep saying such harsh things about people."
"In faith, she’s too curst.","Honestly, she is too ill-tempered."
"Too curst is more than curst. I shall lessen God’s sending but to a cow too curst, he sends none.","Being “too ill-tempered” is different from being simply “ill-tempered,” right? So I suppose that means I can escape God’s punishment, for in the old proverb, it is said that “God gives an ill-tempered cow short horns” so that she can’t inflict damage on anyone. But it doesn’t say anything about a cow that is too ill-tempered."
"So, by being too curst, God will send you no horns.","So then, for being too argumentative, God won’t send you any horns?"
"Just, if he send me no husband, for the which blessing I am at him upon my knees every morning and evening. Lord, I rather lie in the woolen.","Exactly By saying God won’t give horns, Beatrice jokes that she won’t have a husband. Exactly . I pray every morning and night that the Lord won’t send me a husband. Really, I couldn’t stand a husband with a beard. I’d rather be wrapped in scratchy blankets all night."
You may light on a husband that hath no beard.,Maybe you will find a husband without a beard.
"What should I do with him? Dress him in my apparel and make him my waiting gentlewoman? He that hath a beard a man; and he that is more than a youth is not for me, and he that is less than a man, I am not for him. Therefore I will even take sixpence in earnest of the bearherd, and lead his apes into hell.","And then what would I do with him? Dress him up in my clothes and pretend he’s my lady servant? If he has a beard, he’s more than a boy; if he doesn’t have a beard, he’s less than a man. If he’s more than a boy, he’s not the one for me, and if he’s less than a man, I’m not the one for him. They say that women who die unmarried are destined to lead the apes to hell, and I suppose that’ll be my fate as well."
"Well then, go you into hell?",So you’ll go to hell?
"No, but to the gate, and there will the devil meet me like an old cuckold with horns on his head, and say, “Get you to heaven, Beatrice, get you to heaven; here’s no place for you maids.” So deliver I up my apes and away to Saint Peter. For live we as merry as the day is long.","No, just to the gates of hell, where the devil will meet me, with the horns on his head like a cuckold, and say, “Go up to heaven, Beatrice. Hell is no place for you virgins.” So I’ll fly up to heaven (leaving the apes behind) where I’ll be met by Saint Peter guarding heaven’s gates. He will show me the part of heaven where the bachelors sit, and I’ll have fun there forever."
"(to HERO)Well, niece, I trust you will be ruled by your father.","(to HERO) Well, niece, I trust that you will defer to your father on these important decisions."
"Yes, faith, it is my cousin’s duty to make curtsy and say, him be a handsome fellow, or else make another curtsy and say, “Father, as it please me.”","Surely, my cousin has a duty to please her father. But if the husband her father chooses isn’t handsome, she should sweetly tell her father that she will please herself—with another one."
"Well, niece, I hope to see you one day fitted with a husband.","Well, niece, I hope that I will see you married one day."
"Not till God make men of some other metal than earth. piece of valiant dust? To make an account of her life to a clod of wayward marl? No, uncle, I’ll none. Adam’s sons are my brethren, and truly I hold it a sin to match in my kindred.","No, I won’t take a husband until they make men out of something other than dirt. What woman wouldn’t be distressed, being lorded over by a handful of dust? Can you imagine being hitched to a lump of clay? No, uncle, I won’t be married. And anyhow, if Adam Adam, the biblical father of mankind, is said to be made from “the dust of the ground” (Genesis : ). Adam is the father of all mankind, then his sons are my brothers, and really I believe that incest is a sin."
"(to HERO) Daughter, remember what I told you. If the","(to HERO) Daughter, remember what I told you. If the Prince asks for your hand in marriage, you know what to tell him."
"The fault will be in the music, cousin, if you be not wooed in good time. If the Prince be too important, tell him there is measure in everything, and so dance out the answer. For hear me, Hero, wooing, wedding, and repenting is as a and hasty like a Scotch jig, and full as fantastical; the wedding, mannerly modest as a measure, full of state and ancientry; and then comes repentance, and with his bad legs falls into the cinquepace faster and faster till he sink","But cousin, make sure he woos you properly and appropriately. If he is too insistent, tell him that romance is like a dance: it has its own rhythm and timing. Look, the three stages of romance are like three different dances. The wooing is like a Scottish jig: hot and fast and full of whimsy and illusion. The wedding is a like a dance you would do before the King: proper and decorous. Finally, you get to the part where you regret having gotten married in the first place. It is like the lively cinquepace Cinquepace is an energetic five-step dance. cinquepace : it goes faster and faster until you eventually topple over and die."
"Cousin, you apprehend passing shrewdly.","Niece, you are exceptionally perceptive."
"I have a good eye, uncle. I can see a church by daylight.","I have a good eye, uncle. I can see what’s in broad daylight."
"The revelers are entering, brother. Make good room.",The partygoers have arrived. Let’s give them room.
"Lady, will you walk a bout with your friend?","My lady, will you have a dance with me?"
"yours for the walk, and especially when I walk away.","As long as you move gracefully, look handsome, and say nothing, I’m yours for the dance. And I’ll even linger after I’ve gone."
With me in your company?,Will I be with you then?
I may say so when I please.,"Perhaps, if I decide to let you."
And when please you to say so?,And when will that be?
like the case!,"When I like the way you look, for God forbid your face be as ugly as your mask!"
My visor is Philemon’s roof; within the house is Jove.,"My mask is like the roof of the poor Philemon’s Philemon was a peasant who entertained the disguised Jove in the disguised Jove in his humble cottage. Philemon’s humble cottage; underneath the mask, I am as magnificent as the glorious god Jove."
"Why, then, your visor should be thatched.","Well, then, since Philemon’s roof was thatched with straw, your mask should have a beard."
Speak low if you speak love.,"If you wish to speak of love, speak more softly."
"Well, I would you did like me.","Well, I wish you liked me."
"So would not I for your own sake, for I have many ill qualities.","I’m glad I don’t, for your sake. I have many awful qualities."
Which is one?,Tell me one.
I say my prayers aloud.,I say my prayers out loud.
I love you the better; the hearers may cry “Amen.”,"That makes me love you even more. Everyone who hears you can shout, “Amen.”"
God match me with a good dancer!,God give me a good dance partner!
Amen.,Amen. That would be me.
"And God keep him out of my sight when the dance is done! Answer, clerk.",And God take him away from me when we’re finished dancing! Go ahead—say “Amen.”
No more words. The clerk is answered.,No more talking. I’ve got my answer.
I know you well enough. You are Signor Antonio.,I know who you are; you are Signior Antonio.
"At a word, I am not.","No, really, I’m not."
I know you by the waggling of your head.,I can tell by the way you waggle your head.
"To tell you true, I counterfeit him.","Really, I’m only pretending to be him."
You could never do him so ill-well unless you were the very he.,"You could only imitate his imperfections so well if you were the man himself. Look, you’ve got his wrinkled hands. You are Antonio, you are he."
"At a word, I am not.","In short, I’m not."
"Come, come, do you think I do not know you by your excellent wit? Can virtue hide itself? Go to, mum, you are","Come on, do you think I can’t recognize you by your excellent wit? Can a good thing hide itself? Be quiet, you are Antonio. A man’s virtues will always show themselves, and that’s the end of that."
Will you not tell me who told you so?,Won’t you tell me who told you that?
"No, you shall pardon me.","No, you’ll have to excuse me."
Nor will you not tell me who you are?,And you won’t tell me who you are?
Not now.,Not now.
Hundred Merry Tales! Well this was Signor Benedick that said so.,"Who said that I was disdainful, and that I got all my best lines out of a bad joke book?! Well, it must have been Signior Benedick."
What’s he?,Who’s that?
I am sure you know him well enough.,I’m sure you know him.
"Not I, believe me.","No I don’t, believe me."
Did he never make you laugh?,"What, he never made you laugh?"
"I pray you, what is he?","Please tell me, who is this man?"
"Why, he is the Prince’s jester, a very dull fool, only his gift is in devising impossible slanders. None but libertines in his villainy, for he both pleases men and angers them, and then they laugh at him and beat him. I am sure he is in the fleet. I would he had boarded me.","Why, he’s the Prince’s fool, and a very dull fool at that. His only talent is his capacity to come up with unbelievable slanders. Only the most immoral people enjoy his company, and they like him not for his wit but his outrageousness. He manages to both please and anger people; they laugh at him and then beat him up. I’m sure he’s out there dancing. I could have sworn he trampled on me."
"When I know the gentleman, I’ll tell him what you say.","When I meet this gentleman, I’ll tell him what you’ve said."
"peradventure not marked or not laughed at, strikes him into melancholy, and then there’s a partridge wing saved, for the fool will eat no supper that night.","Oh, please do. He’ll say a few nasty things about me, and if nobody listens to him or laughs, he’ll be thrown into a funk. And that will save a partridge wing from being eaten, because he’ll be too miserable for dinner."
We must follow the leaders.,"Come on, we have to follow the leaders of the dance."
In every good thing.,In every good thing they do.
"Nay, if they lead to any ill, I will leave them at the next turning.","No, if they try to lead us to harm, I will leave the dance floor at the next song."
"(to BORACHIO) Sure my brother is amorous on Hero, and hath withdrawn her father to break with him about it. The","(to BORACHIO) My brother just wooed Hero and now has taken her father inside to tell him his feelings. The ladies have followed Hero, but one masked man remains."
And that is Claudio. I know him by his bearing.,That’s Claudio. I can tell by the way he carries himself.
(to CLAUDIO) Are not you Signor Benedick?,(to CLAUDIO) Aren’t you Signior Benedick?
You know me well. I am he.,You know me too well. I am Benedick.
"Signor, you are very near my brother in his love. He is is no equal for his birth. You may do the part of an honest man in it.","Sir, my brother is very fond of you. He is in love with Hero. Please make him change his mind. She doesn’t have the proper rank to marry the Prince. You would be doing a good service."
How know you he loves her?,How do you know he loves her?
I heard him swear his affection.,I heard him swear he did.
"So did I too, and he swore he would marry her tonight.","I did too, and he also swore he would marry her tonight."
"Come, let us to the banquet.","Come on, let’s get to the banquet."
"(unmasking) Thus answer I in the name of Benedick, But hear these ill news with the ears of Claudio. Friendship is constant in all other things Save in the office and affairs of love. Therefore all hearts in love use their own tongues. Let every eye nogetiate for itself Against whose charms faith melteth into blood. This is an accident of hourly proof, Which I mistrusted not. Farewell, therefore, Hero.","(taking off his mask) Though I said my name was Benedick, I heard this news with Claudio’s ears. Of course the Prince wants Hero for himself. Friendship is enduring except when love is involved. Therefore, all lovers should speak for themselves. They should look for themselves, without asking someone else to get involved in their affairs. Beauty is a witch whose spells can turn loyalty into passion. This happens a lot, but it didn’t occur to me that it would happen to me. Goodbye then, Hero."
Count Claudio?,Claudio?
"Yea, the same.","Yes, that’s me."
"Come, will you go with me?",Will you come with me?
Whither?,Where?
"Even to the next willow, about your own business, county. What fashion will you wear the garland of? About your lieutenant’s scarf? You must wear it one way, for the Prince hath gat your Hero.","Right over to that willow tree The willow tree is a symbol of unrequited love. willow tree to see about your business. How do you want to wear your garland of willow leaves? Around your neck, like a moneylender’s gold chain, or under your arm, like a lieutenant’s sash? You have to wear it somehow, because the Prince has gotten your Hero."
I wish him joy of her.,I hope he enjoys her.
"Why, that’s spoken like an honest drover; so they sell you thus?",You sound like a cattle dealer: that’s the way they sell bulls. But do you really think the Prince would treat you that way?
"I pray you, leave me.","Please, leave me alone."
"Ho, now you strike like the blind man. 'Twas the boy that stole your meat, and you’ll beat the post.","Look at you, thrashing about like a blind man. A boy robbed you, but you’ll beat up the post instead."
"If it will not be, I’ll leave you.","If you won’t leave, then I’ll leave."
"Alas, poor hurt fowl, now will he creep into sedges. But that my Lady Beatrice should know me, and not know me! The Prince’s fool! Ha, it may be I go under that title because I am merry. Yea, but so I am apt to do myself wrong. I am not so that puts the world into her person and so gives me out. Well, I’ll be revenged as I may.","Oh, the poor bird. Now he’ll hide himself in the bushes. But how strange that Beatrice should seem to know who I was and yet not know at the same time. “The Prince’s fool”! Maybe they call me that because I am cheerful. Yes, but I am insulting myself by thinking this way. I don’t have that kind of reputation! Beatrice’s mean, sarcastic nature makes her believe that the entire world shares her opinions; that’s why she describes me this way. Well, I’ll get my revenge."
"Now, Signior, where’s the Count? Did you see him?","Now, sir, where is Claudio? Did you see him?"
"Troth, my lord, I have played the part of Lady Fame. I him, and I think I told him true, that your Grace had got the goodwill of this young lady, and I offered him my company to a willow tree, either to make him a garland, as being forsaken, or to bind him up a rod, as being worthy to be","Yes, my lord, I played the part of a gossip and brought him the news. I found him here, as sad as a rabbit in a burrow Many disagree about what the original line means. Another translation may be: “as sad as a solitary house in an open field.” as sad as a rabbit in a burrow . I told him—and I think I was telling the truth—that you had won the lady’s heart. I offered to accompany him to the willow tree, where he could either make a garland—fit to be worn by an abandoned lover—or gather sticks into a bundle, ready for his beating."
To be whipped? What’s his fault?,"Beating? Why, what did he do?"
"The flat transgression of a schoolboy who, being overjoyed with finding a birds' nest, shows it his companion, and he steals it.","He was like a schoolboy who finds a bird’s nest and happily shows it to his friend, who then steals it from him."
is in the stealer.,"What, is trusting a friend such a crime? The criminal is the one who stole the nest."
"Yet it had not been amiss the rod had been made, and the garland too, for the garland he might have worn himself and the rod he might have bestowed on you, who, as I take","It might have been appropriate to make both the rod and the garland. He could have worn the garland himself and beaten you with the rod, since you—as I understand it—have stolen his bird’s nest."
I will but teach them to sing and restore them to the owner.,I only want to teach the baby birds to sing; then I will return the nest to its rightful owner.
"If their singing answer your saying, by my faith, you say honestly.",We’ll wait and see; if the chicks follow your lead—if Hero is ready to love Claudio—then we’ll know you’re telling the truth.
The Lady Beatrice hath a quarrel to you. The gentleman,Lady Beatrice is angry with you. The gentleman she danced with told her you insulted her.
"O, she misused me past the endurance of a block! An oak but with one green leaf on it would have answered her. My very visor began to assume life and scold with her. She told me, not thinking I had been myself, that I was the Prince’s upon jest with such impossible conveyance upon me that I stood like a man at a mark with a whole army shooting at me. She speaks poniards, and every word stabs. If her breath were as terrible as her terminations, there were no not marry her, though she were endowed with all that Adam had left him before he transgressed. She would have made Hercules have turned spit, yea, and have cleft his club to make the fire, too. Come, talk not of her. You shall find scholar would conjure her, for certainly, while she is here, a man may live as quiet in hell as in a sanctuary, and people sin upon purpose because they would go thither. So indeed all disquiet, horror and perturbation follows her.","Not even a block of wood could handle her abuses! An oak tree barely clinging to life would have revived itself to fight her. Even my mask seemed to come to life in order to argue with her. She told me—not realizing it was me—that I was the Prince’s jester and as dull as mud. She hurled mocking insults at me with such incredible speed that all I could do was stand there, paralyzed. She speaks daggers, and every word stabs. If her breath were as terrible as her words, she would kill every living thing from here to the furthest star. I wouldn’t marry her, even if she were as blessed as paradise. If she were married to the great hero Hercules, she would have humiliated him with chores around the house and ordered him to chop up his famous club for firewood. Please, don’t mention her. She’s as wicked as Ate Ate was the goddess of conflict. Ate , just disguised in pretty clothes. I wish to God that some wise man would conjure her away, because as long as she lives on earth, our lives are filled with turmoil. It’s quieter in hell, where people, sinning on purpose, are eager to be sent just to get away from her. So chaos, horror, and sorrow follow her wherever she goes."
"Look, here she comes.","Look, here she comes."
"Will your grace command me any service to the world’s end? I will go on the slightest errand now to the Antipodes that you can devise to send me on. I will fetch you a toothpicker now from the furthest inch of Asia, bring you great Cham’s beard, do you any embassage to the Pygmies, rather than hold three words' conference with this harpy. You have no employment for me?","Your highness, could you send me on a mission to the ends of the earth? I’ll go to the Antipodes for any little errand you can think of. I’ll fetch you a toothpick from the farthest reaches of Asia Fantastical items located in distant lands. farthest reaches of Asia , or find out Prester John’s shoe size, or snatch a hair from Kublai Khan’s beard, or deliver any message you wish to relay to the Pygmies—anything rather than exchange three words with this awful, screeching woman. Isn’t there something you want from me?"
None but to desire your good company.,Nothing but your good company.
Lady Tongue!,"Oh, God, sir, here comes a dish I hate. I can’t stand tongue."
"(to BEATRICE) Come, lady, come, you have lost the heart of Signior Benedick.","(to BEATRICE) Lady, you have lost Signior Benedick’s heart."
"Indeed, my lord, he lent it me awhile, and I gave him use for won it of me with false dice. Therefore your Grace may well say I have lost it.","It’s true, my lord. He lent it to me once, and I paid him back with interest: a double heart for his single one. Really, he won it from me once before in a dishonest game of dice. So I suppose your grace can truly say that I have lost it."
"You have put him down, lady, you have put him down.","You’ve humiliated him, lady: you’ve put him down."
"So I would not he should do me, my lord, lest I should prove you sent me to seek.","And I hope that he won’t put me down Beatrice means “put down” in the sense of to “take to bed.” put me down or I’m sure to have fools for children.I’ve brought Claudio, who you sent me to find."
"Why, how now, Count, wherefore are you sad?","Why, what’s wrong, count? Why are you so sad?"
"Not sad, my lord.","I’m not sad, my lord."
"How then, sick?","What then, sick?"
"Neither, my lord.","I’m neither, my lord."
"The Count is neither sad, nor sick, nor merry, nor well, but civil count, civil as an orange, and something of that jealous complexion.","The count is neither sad nor sick nor cheerful nor well—he’s just civil, as Seville as an orange, with the same jealous-yellow complexion. Beatrice puns with the name of a town in Spain famous for its oranges."
"I' faith, lady, I think your blazon to be true, though, I’ll be have wooed in thy name, and fair Hero is won. I have broke with her father and his goodwill obtained. Name the day of marriage, and God give thee joy.","Truly, lady, I think your description is correct, though I swear he has no reason to look like that. Here, Claudio, I’ve wooed Hero for you, and she’s agreed to marry you. I’ve told her father, and he’s given his permission. Tell us when you wish to get married, and may God give you joy."
"Count, take of me my daughter, and with her my fortunes. to it.","Claudio, take my daughter, and, with her, take my fortunes. The Prince has made the match, and may God bless it."
"Speak, Count, ’tis your cue.","Speak, Claudio, that’s your cue."
"Silence is the perfectest herald of joy. I were but little happy if I could say how much.—Lady, as you are mine, I am exchange.","Complete joy makes one speechless; if I were only a little happy, then I could say exactly how much. Lady, you are mine and I am yours. For you, I give myself away and I’m ecstatic about the exchange."
"Speak, cousin, or if you cannot, stop his mouth with a kiss and let not him speak neither.","Say something, cousin. Or, if you can’t say anything, stop his mouth with a kiss and don’t let him speak, either."
"In faith, lady, you have a merry heart.","Truly, lady, you have a merry heart."
of care. My cousin tells him in his ear that he is in her heart.,"Yes, my lord. I thank my heart—the poor fool—for it keeps away from seriousness. Look, my cousin is whispering to Claudio that she loves him."
"And so she doth, cousin.","Why, you’re absolutely right, cousin."
"Good Lord for alliance! Thus goes everyone to the world but I, and I am sunburnt. I may sit in a corner and cry,","Thank the lord for alliances! So everyone goes off into the world except me, who stays in because I’m sunburned. I should sit in the corner and sing that song, “Heigh-Ho for a Husband!”"
"Lady Beatrice, I will get you one.","Lady Beatrice, I’ll get you a husband."
"I would rather have one of your father’s getting. Hath your grace ne'er a brother like you? Your father got excellent husbands, if a maid could come by them.","I’d rather get a husband from your father. Don’t you have any brothers like you? Your father’s sons would make excellent husbands, if only a girl could catch one for herself."
"Will you have me, lady?","Will you take me, my lady?"
"No, my lord, unless I might have another for working days. Your Grace is too costly to wear every day. But I beseech your Grace pardon me. I was born to speak all mirth and no matter.","No, my lord, unless I could have another husband for the work week. You are too expensive to wear every day. But please, forgive me, your highness. I was born to speak cleverly, not seriously."
"becomes you, for out o' question you were born in a merry hour.","I’d be more offended if you were silent, for being lively and cheerful suits you best. Surely, you must have been born at a happy time."
"No, sure, my lord, my mother cried, but then there was a star danced, and under that was I born.—Cousins, God","Actually, my lord, my mother cried when she was giving birth to me. But then a star danced in the sky, and that’s the moment I was born.—Kinsmen, I’m off."
"Niece, will you look to those things I told you of?","Niece, will you take care of those things I mentioned?"
"I cry you mercy, uncle.—By your Grace’s pardon.","Oh, yes, I’m sorry, uncle.—If you’ll excuse me, your grace."
"By my troth, a pleasant-spirited lady.","I swear, she’s a very good-natured lady."
"There’s little of the melancholy element in her, my lord. She I have heard my daughter say she hath often dreamed of unhappiness and waked herself with laughing.","There’s very little about her that’s gloomy, my lord. She’s only sad when she sleeps—and not even then. Hero told me that Beatrice has often had dreams about being unhappy, and managed to wake herself from them by laughing."
She cannot endure to hear tell of a husband.,She can’t stand to hear about getting a husband.
"Oh, by no means. She mocks all her wooers out of suit.","No, not at all. She mocks all her suitors so severely that they drop the suit."
She were an excellent wife for Benedict.,She would make a good wife for Benedick.
"O Lord, my lord, if they were but a week married, they would talk themselves mad.","Oh, Lord, if they were married, they’d drive themselves crazy within a week."
"County Claudio, when mean you to go to church?","Count Claudio, when do you plan to go to church and be married?"
"Tomorrow, my lord. Time goes on crutches till love have all","Tomorrow, my lord. Time will move as slowly as an old man until our love receives its proper ceremony."
"Not till Monday, my dear son, which is hence a just sevennight, and a time too brief, too, to have all things answer my mind.","Wait till Monday, my dear son, which is only a week away. Even that is too short a time to plan things the way I would like."
"(to CLAUDIO) Come, you shake the head at so long a dully by us. I will in the interim undertake one of Hercules' labors, which is to bring Signor Benedick and the Lady Beatrice into a mountain of affection, th' one with th' other. I would fain have it a match, and I doubt not but to fashion give you direction.","(to CLAUDIO) Oh, don’t look so frustrated at having to wait so long. I promise you, Claudio, the time will go by quickly. While we’re waiting for the wedding, I’m going to take on an impossible task: to make Signior Benedick and the Lady Beatrice fall in love with each other. I aim to see them matched, and with all of your help, I’m sure we can make it happen."
"My lord, I am for you, though it cost me ten nights' watchings.","My lord, I will help you, even if it means I have to stay awake for ten nights straight."
"And I, my lord.","Me too, my lord."
"And you too, gentle Hero?","And you, sweet Hero?"
"I will do any modest office, my lord, to help my cousin to a good husband.","I’ll do any decent thing, my lord, to help my cousin get a good husband."
"And Benedick is not the unhopefulest husband that I know. Thus far can I praise him: he is of a noble strain, of approved your cousin that she shall fall in love with Benedick.—And I, with your two helps, will so practice on Benedick that, in despite of his quick wit and his queasy stomach, he shall fall in love with Beatrice. If we can do this, Cupid is no love gods. Go in with me, and I will tell you my drift.","And Benedick is not the worst husband I can think of. This much I can say about him: he is well-born, has proven his bravery in battle, and has established his good character. Hero, I’ll show you how to influence your cousin so she falls in love with Benedick. We men will trick Benedick so that, despite his quick wit and his queasiness about marriage, he will fall in love with her. If we can do this, then we will steal Cupid’s glory. We will be the supreme love gods! Come inside with me, and I will tell you my plan."
It is so. The Count Claudio shall marry the daughter of Leonato.,It’s arranged. The Count Claudio will marry Leonato’s daughter.
"Yea, my lord, but I can cross it.","Yes, my lord, but I can spoil it."
"Any bar, any cross, any impediment will be med'cinable to athwart his affection ranges evenly with mine. How canst thou cross this marriage?","Any obstacle or barrier to Claudio’s happiness will be like medicine to me. I hate him so much it makes me sick, and whoever can ruin his happiness will make me happy. How will you wreck this marriage?"
"Not honestly, my lord, but so covertly that no dishonesty shall appear in me.","I can only do it by lying, my lord, but I can do it so secretly that no one will suspect me."
Show me briefly how.,"Quickly, tell me how."
"I think I told your lordship a year since how much I am in the favor of Margaret, the waiting gentlewoman to Hero.","I think it was a year ago that I told you how much Margaret, Hero’s servant woman, likes me."
I remember.,I remember.
"I can, at any unseasonable instant of the night, appoint her","I can arrange it so that at some indecent hour of the night, she looks out Hero’s bedroom window."
What life is in that to be the death of this marriage?,How will that kill this marriage?
"The poison of that lies in you to temper. Go you to the Prince your brother. Spare not to tell him that he hath wronged his honor in marrying the renowned Claudio, contaminated stale, such a one as Hero.","That part is up to you. Go to the Prince, your brother, and tell him that he has done a terrible thing by matching the renowned Claudio—whom you greatly admire—with such a tainted whore as Hero."
What proof shall I make of that?,What will be my evidence?
"Proof enough to misuse the Prince, to vex Claudio, to undo Hero, and kill Leonato. Look you for any other issue?","Evidence enough to deceive the Prince, anger Claudio, ruin Hero, and kill Leonato. Is there anything else you wish?"
"Only to despite them, I will endeavor anything.","That’s all I want, and I’ll do anything to accomplish it."
"Go then, find me a meet hour to draw Don Pedro and the Count Claudio alone. Tell them that you know that Hero loves me. Intend a kind of zeal both to the Prince and Claudio, as in love of your brother’s honor, who hath made be cozened with the semblance of a maid, that you have discovered thus. They will scarcely believe this without trial. Offer them instances, which shall bear no less likelihood than to see me at her chamber window, hear me and bring them to see this the very night before the intended wedding, for in the meantime I will so fashion the matter that Hero shall be absent, and there shall appear such seeming truth of Hero’s disloyalty that jealousy shall","Find a time to speak with Don Pedro and Claudio alone. Tell them you know that Hero loves me. Pretend to be very concerned about both the Prince, who has compromised his honor by making the match, and Claudio, whose reputation will be ruined by this woman who’s pretending to be a virgin. Of course, they won’t believe you without proof. Tell them you’ve seen the two of us at Hero’s bedroom window, and then bring them to see for themselves on the night before the wedding. I’ll arrange it so that Hero is away for the night, so what they’ll actually see is Margaret and me at the window, calling each other “Hero” and “Claudio.” Some editors assume “Claudio” is an error, and change it to “Borachio.” “Claudio.” It’ll be such blatant evidence of Hero’s disloyalty that Claudio’s jealousy will quickly turn to certainty, and the wedding will be instantly called off."
"Grow this to what adverse issue it can, I will put it in practice. Be cunning in the working this, and thy fee is a thousand ducats.","Make the arrangements, and I’ll do it. Do this carefully, and I will reward you with a thousand gold coins."
"Be you constant in the accusation, and my cunning shall not","If you make the accusation convincingly, then my cunning won’t fail me."
I will presently go learn their day of marriage.,I’ll go now to find out the date of the wedding.
Boy!,Boy!
Signior?,Yes Signior?
In my chamber window lies a book. Bring it hither to me in the orchard.,In my bedroom window there is a book. Go get it and bring it to me here in the orchard.
"I am here already, sir.","I’m already here, sir."
"I know that, but I would have thee hence and here again.","I see that you are here, but I’d like you to go there and then come back again. The boy means, “It\’s as good as done,” but Benedick plays as if he takes the boy literally."
"I do much wonder that one man, seeing how much another man is a fool when he dedicates his behaviors to love, will, after he hath laughed at such shallow follies in others, and such a man is Claudio. I have known when there was no music with him but the drum and the fife, and now had he rather hear the tabor and the pipe. I have known when he would have walked ten mile afoot to see a good armor, and doublet. He was wont to speak plain and to the purpose, like an honest man and a soldier, and now is he turned orthography; his words are a very fantastical banquet, just so many strange dishes. May I be so converted and see with","I’m amazed that a man, after watching romance turn another man into a fool and laughing at that man, can turn right around and become the thing he’s scorned. That’s the kind of man Claudio is. I knew him when he listened to nothing but the military drum and fife; now he would rather hear the sweet and refined music of the tabor and pipe. I knew him when he would’ve walked ten miles to see a well-crafted suit of armor; now he spends ten nights awake in his room designing himself a fancy new jacket. He used to speak plainly and to the point, like an honorable man and soldier; now his speech is elaborate and flowery. His words are like a miraculous banquet, full of strange new dishes. Will I be changed like that, and see the world through a lover’s eyes? I’m not sure, but I don’t think so."
"I will not be sworn but love may transform me to an oyster, but I’ll take my oath on it, till he have made an oyster of me, he shall never make me such a fool. One woman is fair, yet I am well; another is wise, yet I am well; another virtuous, woman shall not come in my grace. Rich she shall be, that’s certain; wise, or I’ll none; virtuous, or I’ll never cheapen her; fair, or I’ll ever look on her; mild, or come not near me; noble, or not I for an angel; of good discourse, an please God. Ha! The Prince and Monsieur Love! I will hide me in the arbor.","I can’t promise that love won’t transform me, but I can promise you this: until I truly fall in love, a woman will never make me act like such a fool. A beautiful woman comes along, but I’m unmoved. A wise woman turns up, but I’m unmoved. A virtuous woman appears, but I’m unmoved. I refuse to fall in love until all three qualities unite in a single woman. She must be rich, certainly, and smart, or I’ll have nothing to do with her. She has to be virtuous, or I’ll never bid on her; beautiful, or I won’t bother to look at her. Mild-mannered, or else she should stay away from me. Noble, or I won’t have her even if she’s an angel. She must be well spoken, an excellent musician, and her hair should be—well, I suppose the color doesn’t matter. Ha! Look, it’s the Prince and Mr. Love. I’ll hide in the arbor."
"Come, shall we hear this music?","Well, should we hear some music?"
"Yea, my good lord. How still the evening is,","Yes, my lord. Listen to how quiet the evening is, as if it’s purposefully setting the stage for a song."
(aside to CLAUDIO) See you where Benedick hath hid himself?,(speaking so that only CLAUDIOcan hear) Do you see where Benedick is hiding?
"(aside to DON PEDRO) O, very well, my lord. The music ended,","(speaking so that only DON PEDROcan hear) Yes, very well, my lord. Once the music has ended, we’ll give him more than he bargained for."
"Come, Balthasar, we’ll hear that song again.","Come on, Balthasar, let’s hear that song again."
"O, good my lord, tax not so bad a voice To slander music anymore than once.","Oh, my good lord, don’t make me insult music again with my awful singing."
"It is the witness still of excellency I pray thee, sing, and let me woo no more.","You can tell an artist is excellent when he denies his own perfection. Please, sing for us; don’t make me woo you anymore!"
"Because you talk of wooing, I will sing, Since many a wooer doth commence his suit To her he thinks not worthy, yet he woos,","Since you put it that way, I’ll sing. You’re like a suitor who courts a woman insincerely, swearing that he loves her even though he really doesn’t find her worthy."
"Nay, pray thee, come, Or, if thou wilt hold longer argument, Do it in notes.","Come on, please sing. If you’d like to continue this discussion, at least do so with music."
Note this before my notes: There’s not a note of mine that’s worth the noting.,Just know this before I begin: I can’t play a single note that’s worthy of note.
"Why, these are very crotchets that he speaks!",Listen to him speaking in quarter notes! Get on with your note-playing now.
"(aside) Now, divine air! Now is his soul ravished. Is it not strange that sheeps' guts should hale souls out of men’s bodies? Well, a horn for my money, when all’s done.","(to himself) That music must be divine, because their souls have been captivated. Isn’t it strange that strings made of sheep’s guts are capable of drawing men’s souls out of their bodies? Well, I’d rather listen to a plain old hunting horn than this music, when all is said and done."
"(singing) Sigh no more, ladies, sigh no more, Men were deceivers ever, One foot in sea and one on shore, To one thing constant never. Then sigh not so, but let them go, And be you blithe and bonny, Converting all your sounds of woe Into Hey, nonny nonny. Sing no more ditties, sing no mo Of dumps so dull and heavy. The fraud of men was ever so, Since summer first was leavy. Then sigh not so, but let them go And be you blithe and bonny, Converting all your sounds of woe Into Hey, nonny nonny.","(singing) Don’t cry anymore, ladies, don’t cry anymore Men have always been deceivers, One foot on a ship and one on the shore, Never devoted to anything. So don’t cry like that, just let them go And be happy and carefree forever, Turning all your sad sounds around When you sing “Hey, nonny nonny” instead. Don’t sing more sad songs About being down in the dumps For men have been committing this kind of fraud Ever since the first summer trees had leaves. So don’t cry like that, just let them go And be happy and carefree forever, Turning all your sad sounds around When you sing “Hey, nonny nonny” instead."
"By my troth, a good song.",That’s a good song.
"And an ill singer, my lord.","And a bad singer, my lord."
"Ha, no, no, faith, thou sing’st well enough for a shift.","Ha! No, no, really, your voice is good enough in a pinch."
"(aside) An he had been a dog that should have howled thus, they would have hanged him. And I pray God his bad voice come what plague could have come after it.","(to himself) If a dog had howled like that, I would have hung it. I hope his horrible singing doesn’t have any ill effects. I would’ve rather listened to the night raven screech, even if the bird’s noise does give me the plague, as they say it will."
"Yea, marry, dost thou hear, Balthasar? I pray thee, get us some excellent music, for tomorrow night we would have it at the Lady Hero’s chamber window","Yes, do you hear me, Balthasar? Please, get some excellent music, because tomorrow we want to serenade Lady Hero at her bedroom window."
"The best I can, my lord.","I’ll do the best I can, my lord."
Do so. Farewell.,Please do. Goodbye.
"Come hither, Leonato. What was it you told me of today, that your niece Beatrice was in love with Signor Benedick?","Come here, Leonato. What was it that you told me today—that your niece Beatrice was in love with Signior Benedick?"
"Oh, ay. (aside to DON PEDRO) Stalk on, stalk on; the fowl man.","Oh yes. (speaking so that only DON PEDRO can hear) Go on, keep walking: our prey is in sight.—I never thought that woman would love any man."
"No, nor I neither, but most wonderful that she should so dote on Signor Benedick, whom she hath in all outward behaviors seemed ever to abhor.","I didn’t, either. But how wonderful that she should be so fond of Signior Benedick, whom she has always appeared to hate."
(aside) Is ’t possible? Sits the wind in that corner?,(to himself) Is it possible? Is that the way the wind is blowing?
"By my troth, my lord, I cannot tell what to think of it, but that she loves him with an enraged affection, it is past the infinite of thought.","Really, my lord, I don’t know what to make of it, but she loves him with such a passion that it’s past all understanding."
May be she doth but counterfeit.,Maybe she’s just pretending.
"Faith, like enough.","Yes, that’s quite likely."
O God! Counterfeit? There was never counterfeit of passion came so near the life of passion as she discovers it.,"Oh God! Pretending? No one has ever faked passion as skillfully as this, then."
"Why, what effects of passion shows she?","Why, what symptoms of love does she exhibit?"
(aside to LEONATO) Bait the hook well; this fish will bite.,(speaking so that only LEONATOcan hear) Bait the hook well; this fish is going to bite.
daughter tell you how.,"What symptoms, my lord? She will have a seat—you heard my daughter tell you how."
She did indeed.,"Yes, she did tell us."
"How, how I pray you? You amaze me. I would have thought her spirit had been invincible against all assaults of affection.","Please, please tell me! This is amazing. I would have thought she was invincible against any assault of love."
Benedick.,"I would have sworn that, too, my lord, especially against Benedick."
"(aside) I should think this a gull but that the white-bearded fellow speaks it. Knavery cannot, sure, hide himself in such reverence.",(to himself) I would take this as a joke if the old man weren’t saying it. Mischief surely can’t be hiding in such a respectable man.
(aside to DON PEDRO) He hath ta'en th' infection. Hold it up.,(speaking so that only DON PEDROcan hear) We’ve infected him! Keep it up.
Hath she made her affection known to Benedick?,Has she told Benedick how she feels?
"No, and swears she never will. That’s her torment.","No, and she swears she never will. That’s what’s driving her crazy."
"'Tis true indeed, so your daughter says. “Shall I,” says she, “that have so oft encountered him with scorn, write to him","It’s true, Hero says so. Beatrice asks, “Does it make any sense to write and tell him I love him when I have always treated him with scorn?”"
"This says she now when she is beginning to write to him, for she’ll be up twenty times a night, and there will she sit in her smock till she have writ a sheet of paper. My daughter tells us all.","She says this as she begins to write the letter. She’ll be getting up twenty times in a night, sitting there in her slip until she’s written a page. My daughter told me everything."
your daughter told.,"Now that you speak of paper, I remember a funny story of Hero’s."
"Oh, when she had writ it and was reading it over, she found “Benedick” and “Beatrice” between the sheet?","Oh, you mean when Beatrice writes a letter and Hero sees that it has “Benedick” and “Beatrice” written all over it?"
That.,"Yes, that’s the one."
"herself that she should be so immodest to write to one that she knew would flout her. “I measure him,” says she, “by my own spirit, for I should flout him if he writ to me, yea, though I love him, I should.”","Oh, she tears that letter into a thousand small pieces and berates herself for being so forward as to write a letter to a man she knows would mock her. “I compare him,” she says, “to myself, and I know that I would mock him if he wrote me such a letter. Yes, even though I love him, I would mock him.”"
"heart, tears her hair, prays, curses: “O sweet Benedick! God give me patience!”","Then she falls down to her knees, weeps, sobs, beats her breast, tears her hair, prays, and curses: “Oh sweet Benedick! God give me patience!”"
"She doth indeed, my daughter says so, and the ecstasy hath so much overborne her that my daughter is sometime she will do a desperate outrage to herself. It is very true.","She did indeed, my daughter says so. She worries that Beatrice is so overwrought that she might do herself harm someday. It’s true."
"It were good that Benedick knew of it by some other, if she will not discover it.","If she won’t tell Benedick, someone else should."
To what end? He would make but a sport of it and torment,And what would that accomplish? He’ll just turn it into a joke and torment the poor woman even more.
"An he should, it were an alms to hang him. She’s an excellent sweet lady, and, out of all suspicion, she is virtuous.","If he did that, it would be a charitable deed to hang him. She’s an excellent, sweet woman, and there’s no doubt that she is virtuous."
And she is exceeding wise.,And she is very smart.
In every thing but in loving Benedick.,Except for the fact that she loves Benedick.
"Oh, my lord, wisdom and blood combating in so tender a body, we have ten proofs to one that blood hath the victory. I am sorry for her, as I have just cause, being her uncle and her guardian.","Oh, my lord, when wisdom and passion are in one body, it’s ten to one that the passion will win. I am sorry for her, as I should be, since I am both her uncle and her guardian."
daffed all other respects and made her half myself. I pray you tell Benedick of it and hear what he will say.,"I wish she were in love with me instead. I would have thrown away all other considerations and made her my wife. Please, tell Benedick about her feelings and see what he has to say."
"Were it good, think you?","Is that a good idea, do you think?"
"Hero thinks surely she will die, for she says she will die if he and she will die if he woo her rather than she will bate one breath of her accustomed crossness.","Hero thinks Beatrice will surely die, for she says she’ll die if he doesn’t love her, and that she’ll die before she tells him, and she’ll die if he woos her and she’s made to hold back even one of her usual insults."
"She doth well. If she should make tender of her love, ’tis very possible he’ll scorn it, for the man, as you know all,","She’s probably right. If she offers him her love, it’s very possible that he’ll scorn it, since, as we all know, he tends to be contemptuous."
He is a very proper man.,He’s a very proper man.
He hath indeed a good outward happiness.,"Indeed, he is good-looking and carries himself well."
"Before God, and in my mind, very wise.",And I swear to God he’s very smart.
He doth indeed show some sparks that are like wit.,He does indeed show sparks of something like wit.
And I take him to be valiant.,And I believe him to be brave.
"As Hector, I assure you, and in the managing of quarrels you may say he is wise, for either he avoids them with great discretion or undertakes them with a most Christian-like fear.","As brave as Hector Hector was a Trojan warrior, legendary for his bravery. Hector , surely. And you could say that he is wise in managing fights, for he either avoids them discreetly or enters into them timidly."
"break the peace, he ought to enter into a quarrel with fear and trembling.","If he fears God, he must necessarily keep the peace. If he breaks the peace, he ought to enter into a quarrel with fear and trembling."
"And so will he do, for the man doth fear God, howsoever it seems not in him by some large jests he will make. Well, I him of her love?","And he’ll do that, because he’s a God-fearing man, even though his joking makes it seem otherwise. Well, I’m sorry for your niece. Should we go find Benedick and tell him about Beatrice’s love?"
"Never tell him, my lord, let her wear it out with good counsel.","No, don’t ever tell him, my lord. Let her get over it, with the help of good advice."
"Nay, that’s impossible. She may wear her heart out first.","No, that’s impossible. Her heart will break first."
"the while. I love Benedick well, and I could wish he would modestly examine himself to see how much he is unworthy so good a lady.","Well, we’ll hear more about it from your daughter. Let it sit for a while. I am very fond of Benedick, and I just wish he would take a look at himself and realize how unfairly he’s treating this good woman."
"My lord, will you walk? Dinner is ready.","My lord, will you come with me? Dinner is ready."
"upon this, I will never trust my expectation.","(speaking so that only DON PEDROand LEONATO can hear) If he doesn’t fall in love with her now, I’ll never trust my intuition again."
"(aside to LEONATO) Let there be the same net spread for her, and that must your daughter and her gentlewomen carry. The sport will be when they hold one an opinion of I would see, which will be merely a dumb show. Let us send her to call him in to dinner.","(speaking so that only LEONATOcan hear) The same trap must be set for her; that’s your daughter’s and servants' job. The real fun will be when they both believe the other to be in love, without any of it being true. I can’t wait to watch that drama—it’ll be a pantomime, since both of them will be totally speechless! Let’s send Beatrice to call Benedick in to dinner"
"(coming forward) This can be no trick. The conference was sadly borne; they have the truth of this from Hero; they bent. Love me? Why, it must be requited! I hear how I am censured. They sy I will bear myself proudly if I perceive the love come from her. They say, too, that she will rather die than give any sign of affection. I did never think to their detractions and can put them to mending. They say the lady is fair; ’tis a truth, I can bear them witness. And virtuous; ’tis so, I cannot reprove it. And wise, but for loving me; by my troth, it is no addition to her wit, nor no with her! I may chance have some odd quirks and remnants of wit broken on me because I have railed so long against marriage, but doth not the appetite alter? A man loves the meat in his youth that he cannot endure in his age. Shall brain awe a man from the career of his humor? No! The world must be peopled. When I said I would die a bachelor, I did not think I should live till I were married. Here comes Beatrice. By this day, she’s a fair lady. I do spy","(coming forward) This can’t be a trick. They spoke with great seriousness, and they have Hero’s testimony. They seem to pity the lady. It seems her love is stretched to the limit. She loves me? Well, that love must be returned! I hear how I’m criticized. They say I’ll be smug if I find out she loves me. They also say she’d rather die than give any sign of her feelings. I never thought I’d marry. I can’t appear to be proud. People who discover their faults and can then change them are lucky indeed. They say the lady is beautiful; it’s true, I’ve seen it myself. And virtuous; that’s true, I can’t disprove that. And smart, except that she loves me. That may not be any proof of her intelligence, but I swear it won’t be evidence of her stupidity—for I’m going to be horribly in love with her! People might tease me here and there, since I attacked marriage for so long. But don’t tastes change? A man can love a dish when he is young that he hates when he turns old. Will quips and clever remarks and scathing written words keep a man from getting what his heart desires? No! The world needs to be populated. When I said that I’d die as a bachelor, I just meant that I didn’t think I’d live until I got married. Here comes Beatrice. By God! She’s a beautiful lady. I think I sense some signs of love in her."
"Against my will, I am sent to bid you come in to dinner.","Against my will, I’ve been told to bring you in to dinner."
"Fair Beatrice, I thank you for your pains.","Lovely Beatrice, I thank you for taking the pains to tell me that."
"I took no more pains for those thanks than you take pains to thank me. If it had been painful, I would not have come.","I didn’t take any more pains bringing this message than you took pains in thanking me. If the job had been painful, I would not have come."
You take pleasure then in the message?,So you took pleasure in bringing me this message?
"Yea, just so much as you may take upon a knife’s point and choke a daw withal. You have no stomach, Signior. Fare you well.","Yes, as much pleasure as one might take in choking a bird at knifepoint. You don’t want to eat, sir? Goodbye, then."
"Ha! “Against my will I am sent to bid you come in to pains for those thanks than you took pains to thank me.” That’s as much as to say, “Any pains that I take for you is as easy as thanks.” If I do not take pity of her, I am a villain. If I do not love her, I am a Jew. I will go get her picture.","Ha! “Against my will, I’ve been told to bring you in to dinner.” There’s a double meaning in that. “I didn’t take any more pains bringing this message than you took pains in thanking me.” That’s like saying, “Any thing I do for you is as easy as saying ‘thank you.’” If this doesn’t move me to take pity on her, I’m a horrible person. If I don’t love her, I’m completely hard-hearted According to anti-Semitic stereotypes, Jews were supposed to be hard-hearted and lacking a sense of charity. hard-hearted . I will go get her picture."
"Good Margaret, run thee to the parlor. There shalt thou find my cousin Beatrice Proposing with the Prince and Claudio. Whisper her ear and tell her I and Ursula Is all of her. Say that thou overheardst us, And bid her steal into the pleachèd bower Where honeysuckles ripened by the sun Forbid the sun to enter, like favorites Against that power that bred it. There will she hide her To listen our propose. This is thy office. Bear thee well in it and leave us alone.","Margaret, run into the sitting room. You’ll find Beatrice there, talking to Claudio and the Prince. Whisper to her that Ursula and I are walking in the orchard and that we’re talking all about her. Tell her you heard us, and that she should sneak into the arbor where the crisscrossing branches overhead keep the honeysuckles out of the sun. (The same honeysuckles that were once ripened in the sun; they’re like courtiers who rise because the king favors them, then plot to overthrow his Majesty.) She can hide there and eavesdrop on our conversation. This is your job. Do it well, and then leave us."
"I’ll make her come, I warrant you, presently.","I’ll make her come right away, I promise you."
"As we do trace this alley up and down, Our talk must only be of Benedick. When I do name him, let it be thy part To praise him more than ever man did merit. Is sick in love with Beatrice. Of this matter Is little Cupid’s crafty arrow made, That only wounds by hearsay.","All right Ursula, as Beatrice arrives, we’ll be walking up and down this alley and speaking about nothing but Benedick. Whenever I mention him, praise him more than any man deserves. It’ll be my job to talk about how Benedick is sick with love for Beatrice. We’ll make our arrows the same way Cupid does: with gossip and rumor."
"Now begin, For look where Beatrice like a lapwing runs","Let’s start. See, Beatrice has run over like a little bird, keeping close to the ground and trying to overhear us."
(aside to HERO) The pleasant’st angling is to see the fish Cut with her golden oars the silver stream And greedily devour the treacherous bait. Is couchèd in the woodbine coverture. Fear you not my part of the dialogue.,"(speaking so that only HERO can hear) The best part of fishing is watching the fish cut through the water and greedily take the bait. Now we’re fishing for Beatrice, who’s hiding right now in the honeysuckle arbor. Don’t worry, I’ll do my part."
"(aside to URSULA) Then go we near her, that her ear lose nothing (approaching the bower) No, truly, Ursula, she is too disdainful. I know her spirits are as coy and wild As haggards of the rock.","(speaking so that only URSULAcan hear) Then let’s get closer, so she can hear all the false, sweet bait we’re setting for her.— (approaching the bower) No, truly, Ursula, she’s too scornful. She’s as devious and fierce as the wild hawks on the rocks."
But are you sure,But are you sure that Benedick loves Beatrice that much?
So says the Prince and my new-trothèd lord.,That’s what the Prince and my fiancé say.
"And did they bid you tell her of it, madam?","And did they ask you to tell Beatrice about this, madam?"
"They did entreat me to acquaint her of it, But I persuaded them, if they loved Benedick, And never to let Beatrice know of it.","They did want me to tell her, but I persuaded them that, if they truly loved Benedick, they would try to get him to battle his emotions and keep Beatrice in the dark."
Why did you so? Doth not the gentleman Deserve as full as fortunate a bed As ever Beatrice shall couch upon?,Why did you do that? Doesn’t Benedick deserve as much luck with a mate as he would have with Beatrice?
"As much as may be yielded to a man, But Nature never framed a woman’s heart Of prouder stuff than that of Beatrice. Disdain and scorn ride sparkling in her eyes, Values itself so highly that to her All matter else seems weak. She cannot love Nor take no shape nor project of affection She is so self-endeared.","By the god of love, I know that he deserves all that a man might possess. But Nature never made a woman’s heart as proud and tough as Beatrice’s. There is scorn and disdain in her eyes, and those sparkling eyes despise everything they look upon. She values her wit more highly than anything else, which looks weak by comparison. She’s so in love with herself, she’s incapable of loving anyone else. She can’t even imagine what “love” is."
"Sure, I think so, She knew his love, lest she make sport at it.","Yes, you’re right. It would be bad if she knew about Benedick’s love and teased him about it."
"Why, you speak truth. I never yet saw man, How wise, how noble, young, how rarely featured But she would spell him backward. If fair-faced, If black, why, Nature, drawing of an antic, Made a foul blot; if tall, a lance ill-headed; If low, an agate very vilely cut; If speaking, why, a vane blown with all winds; So turns she every man the wrong side out And never gives to truth and virtue that Which simpleness and merit purchaseth.","It’s true. Whenever she meets a man—no matter how wise, noble, young, handsome—she rearranges all his good qualities so they end up looking bad. If he has a fair complexion, she’ll say the pretty man should be her sister, not her husband. If he’s dark-skinned, Nature must have spilled some ink while drawing his foolish face. If he’s tall, she’ll say he’s a spear topped by an odd head; if he’s short, she says he looks like a badly carved miniature. If he’s talkative, he’s a weathervane, moving in all directions at once; if he’s silent, he’s a block that can’t be moved at all. And so she turns men inside out and never acknowledges the integrity and merit that a man has."
"Sure, sure, such carping is not commendable.","It’s true, her nitpicking is hardly admirable."
"As Beatrice is, cannot be commendable. But who dare tell her so? If I should speak, She would mock me into air. O, she would laugh me Out of myself, press me to death with wit.","No, it certainly is not admirable to be so perverse and eccentric. But who would dare tell her? If I said something, she’d mock me so mercilessly that I’d probably disintegrate into air. She’d laugh me right out of my body and kill me with her wit."
"Consume away in sighs, waste inwardly. It were a better death than die with mocks, Which is as bad as die with tickling.","So Benedick should conceal his emotions. Like a fire that gets covered up, Benedick should smother his love and waste away. It would be better to die that way than to die from being mocked, which is as bad as being killed by tickling."
Yet tell her of it. Hear what she will say.,"But you should tell her about this, and hear what she has to say."
And counsel him to fight against his passion; And truly I’ll devise some honest slanders To stain my cousin with. One doth not know How much an ill word may empoison liking.,"No, instead I’ll go to Benedick and advise him to fight his emotions. I’ll make up some awful things about my cousin and ruin her reputation. You don’t know how quickly affection can be killed with a single nasty word."
"She cannot be so much without true judgment, Having so swift and excellent a wit As she is prized to have, as to refuse So rare a gentleman as Signior Benedick.","Oh, don’t injure your cousin like that! With the quick, intelligent wit she’s rumored to have, she can’t really be such a bad judge of character that she’d refuse a man as exceptional as Signior Benedick."
Always excepted my dear Claudio.,"He’s the only worthy man in Italy, aside from my dear Claudio."
"I pray you, be not angry with me, madam, Speaking my fancy. Signor Benedick, For shape, for bearing, argument and valor,","Don’t be angry with me for speaking my mind, but throughout Italy, Benedick is considered the best man in looks, bearing, intelligence, and bravery."
"Indeed, he hath an excellent good name.","True, he has an excellent reputation."
"His excellence did earn it, ere he had it. When are you married, madam?","And he deserves it, having been excellent before he had a reputation for it. When are you getting married, madam?"
"Why, every day, tomorrow. Come, go in. Which is the best to furnish me tomorrow.","Tomorrow, and then every day after that. Come on, let’s go inside. I want to show you some clothing, so you can tell me what I should wear tomorrow."
"(aside to HERO) She’s limed, I warrant you. We have caught her, madam.","(speaking so that only HERO can hear) We caught her in our trap, madam, I’m sure of it."
"(aside to URSULA) Some Cupid kills with arrows, some with traps.","(speaking so that only URSULAcan hear) If so, then you never know where love will come from. Cupid gets some lovers with arrows, but some he lays traps for!"
"(coming forward) What fire is in mine ears? Can this be true? Stand I condemned for pride and scorn so much? No glory lives behind the back of such. And Benedick, love on; I will requite thee, Taming my wild heart to thy loving hand. If thou dost love, my kindness shall incite thee For others say thou dost deserve, and I Believe it better than reportingly.","(coming forward) I’m burning up with shame! Can this be true? Do people criticize me this much for being proud and scornful? Then I’ll say goodbye to my contempt and my pride in being unmarried! No good is spoken of such a person as me behind her back. Benedick, keep on loving me and I will return your love, like a wild hawk being tamed by her handler. I’ll be kind to you from now on, and if you really do love me, that kindness will encourage you to seal our love with a wedding band. People say that you deserve my love, and I believe it—not just because they’ve said so."
"I do but stay till your marriage be consummate, and then go I toward Aragon.","I’ll stay in Messina until you’re married, and then I’ll go to Aragon."
"I’ll bring you thither, my lord, if you’ll vouchsafe me.","I’ll go with you, my lord, if you’ll allow me."
"Nay, that would be as great a soil in the new gloss of your wear it. I will only be bold with Benedick for his company, for from the crown of his head to the sole of his foot he is all mirth. He hath twice or thrice cut Cupid’s bow-string, and the little hangman dare not shoot at him. He hath a heart as heart thinks, his tongue speaks.","No, taking you away from your new marriage would be like showing a child a new coat and then not letting him wear it. I’ll ask only Benedick to come with me, for from the top of his head to the soles of his feet he’s a joker. He’s evaded love once or twice, and since then Cupid doesn’t dare to shoot at him. Benedick’s heart is like a bell, with his tongue as the clapper: everything his heart thinks, his tongue speaks."
"Gallants, I am not as I have been.","Gentleman, I am not the same man I was before."
So say I. Methinks you are sadder.,I agree. I think you seem more serious.
I hope he be in love.,I hope he’s in love.
"be truly touched with love. If he be sad, he wants money.","Come off it, man! There isn’t a single drop of sincerity in him that could be touched with love. If he looks serious, he must need money."
I have the toothache.,I have a toothache Toothache was an ailment associated with lovers. toothache .
Draw it.,Draw it. “Pull it out.” Draw it.
Hang it!,Hang it! An expression of impatience. Hang it!
"You must hang it first, and draw it afterwards.","You have to hang it first. Then you can draw Claudio plays on the fact that criminals were hanged and then “drawn,” or disemboweled. draw it."
"What, sigh for the toothache?","What, are you moaning on about your toothache?"
Where is but a humor or a worm.,It could only have been caused by some humor or worm Most illnesses were attributed to bodily fluids or parasites. worm .
"Well, everyone can master a grief but he that has it.","Well, everyone knows how to overcome an injury except the one who actually has one."
"Yet say I, he is in love.","I repeat, he’s in love."
"that he hath to strange disguises, as to be a Dutchman today, a Frenchman tomorrow, or in the shape of two countries at once, as a German from the waist downward, all slops, and a Spaniard from the hip upward, no doublet. he is no fool for fancy, as you would have it appear he is.","No, there’s no love in him, unless you mean his love for strange costumes. He’s a Dutchman today, a Frenchman tomorrow, and sometimes wears the clothing of two countries at once: a German from the waist down, with his baggy pants, and a Spaniard from the hips up, with a cloak and no jacket. Unless you’re talking about his love for this kind of foolishness—which, judging from his appearance, he has—he is no fool for love, as you pretend."
"If he be not in love with some woman, there is no believing old signs. He brushes his hat o' mornings. What should that bode?","If he’s not in love with a woman, then you can’t trust the usual symptoms. He brushes his hat in the mornings. What do you think that means?"
Hath any man seen him at the barber’s?,Has any man seen him at the barber’s?
"No, but the barber’s man hath been seen with him, and the old ornament of his cheek hath already stuffed tennis balls.","No, but the barber’s assistant has been seen with him. The beard that used to decorate Benedick’s cheeks has been shaved off and is now stuffing tennis balls Tennis balls used to be stuffed with hair. tennis balls ."
"Indeed, he looks younger than he did, by the loss of a beard.",Getting rid of the beard definitely makes him look younger.
"Nay, he rubs himself with civet. Can you smell him out by",And he’s rubbed himself with perfume. Can you smell out his secret now?
"That’s as much as to say, the sweet youth’s in love.",That’s as good as proof that the sweet young man’s in love.
The greatest note of it is his melancholy.,The biggest clue is his seriousness.
And when was he wont to wash his face?,And when has he ever been known to wash his face?
"Yea, or to paint himself? For the which I hear what they say","Yes, or to wear cosmetics? I hear what they say about him for doing that."
"Nay, but his jesting spirit, which is now crept into a lute string and now governed by stops—","Indeed, his mocking spirit has now crawled into a lute A lute is an instrument used in lovers’ serenades. lute , and he can be played like an instrument—"
"Indeed, that tells a heavy tale for him. Conclude, conclude, he is in love.","Truly, it all adds up to a serious story for Benedick. A conclusion, a conclusion: he is in love."
"Nay, but I know who loves him.","Oh, and I know who loves him."
"That would I know too. I warrant, one that knows him not.","I bet I know, too: someone who clearly doesn’t know him at all."
"Yes, and his ill conditions, and, in despite of all, dies for him.","No, she does know him, and she also knows all his bad qualities—and in spite of all this, she still dies for him."
She shall be buried with her face upwards.,"She’ll be buried with her face upwards, then. In Shakespeare’s time, “to die” was slang for having an orgasm; Decision Pedro jokes that the woman will actually die when she “dies”—during sexual intercourse."
"aside with me. I have studied eight or nine wise words to speak to you, which these hobbyhorses must not hear.","This chatter is no cure for my toothache. (to LEONATO) Old sir, please walk with me a bit. I have eight or nine well-considered words to say to you, and I don’t want these fools to hear."
"For my life, to break with him about Beatrice!",I bet my life he’s gone to speak with Leonato about Beatrice!
'Tis even so. Hero and Margaret have by this played their another when they meet.,"It must be. By now, Hero and Margaret have done their part with Beatrice. The two bears won’t bite each other the next time they meet."
"My lord and brother, God save you.","My lord and brother, God save you."
"Good e'en, brother.","Good evening, brother."
"If your leisure served, I would speak with you.","If you don’t mind, I’d like to speak with you."
In private?,In private?
"If it please you. Yet Count Claudio may hear, for what I would speak of concerns him.","If you wish. But Count Claudio can stay, for what I’m about to say concerns him."
What’s the matter?,What’s the matter?
(to CLAUDIO) Means your lordship to be married tomorrow?,(to CLAUDIO) Do you plan on getting married tomorrow?
You know he does.,You know that he does.
"I know not that, when he knows what I know.","I don’t know that, once he knows what I know."
"If there be any impediment, I pray you discover it.","If there’s any reason we shouldn’t get married, I urge you to tell me."
"You may think I love you not. Let that appear hereafter, and aim better at me by that I now will manifest. For my hath holp to effect your ensuing marriage—surely suit ill spent and labor ill bestowed.","You may think that I don’t love you. I hope that, after I tell you my news, you will think better of me. My brother thinks highly of you, and because of his affection, has helped arrange your marriage—but that was definitely a waste of his time and energy."
"Why, what’s the matter?","Why, what’s the matter?"
"I came hither to tell you; and, circumstances shortened, for","I came here to tell you—I’ll make this short, since she’s already been talked about for too long—the lady is unfaithful."
"Who, Hero?","Who, Hero?"
"Even she: Leonato’s Hero, your Hero, every man’s Hero.","That’s the one: Leonato’s Hero, your Hero, every man’s Hero."
Disloyal?,Unfaithful?
"The word is too good to paint out her wickedness. I could her to it. Wonder not till further warrant. Go but with me tonight, you shall see her chamber window entered, even the night before her wedding day. If you love her then, tomorrow wed her. But it would better fit your honor to","The word is too good to represent her wickedness. She is worse than wicked. If you can think of a more awful title, I’ll call her that. But don’t keep wondering without more proof. Come with me tonight, and you’ll see a man enter her bedroom chamber—even tonight, the night before her wedding. If you still love her after that, then marry her tomorrow. But you would be more honorable if you changed your mind."
(to DON PEDRO) May this be so?,(to DON PEDRO) Is this possible?
I will not think it.,I won’t consider it.
"If you dare not trust that you see, confess not that you know. If you will follow me, I will show you enough, and when","If you won’t risk coming to see her tonight, then don’t claim to know what she’s like. If you follow me, I’ll give you all the proof you need. Once you have seen more and heard more, then you can decide what to do."
"If I see anything tonight why I should not marry her, tomorrow in the congregation, where I should wed, there will I shame her.","If I see anything tonight that convinces me not to marry her, I’ll shame her tomorrow in the very congregation where I would have married her."
"And as I wooed for thee to obtain her, I will join with thee","And since I wooed her in your name, I’ll join you in disgracing her."
I will disparage her no farther till you are my witnesses. Bear it coldly but till midnight and let the issue show itself.,"I won’t say anything else about her until you two see things for yourselves. Remain calm until midnight, and then you’ll see what the trouble is."
O day untowardly turned!,"Oh, this day has turned into a disaster!"
O mischief strangely thwarting!,"Oh, mischief has ruined our plans!"
have seen the sequel.,"Oh, a plague has been prevented, thank God! That’s what you’ll say once you’ve seen part two."
Are you good men and true?,Are you all good and honest men?
"Yea, or else it were pity but they should suffer salvation, body and soul.","Yes they are, otherwise it would be proper for them to suffer salvation By “salvation,” he means “damnation.” salvation , body and soul."
"Nay, that were a punishment too good for them, if they Prince’s watch.","If they had any allegiance By “allegiance,” he means “disloyalty.” allegiance when they were chosen for the Prince’s watch, a punishment like that would be too good for them."
"Well, give them their charge, neighbor Dogberry.","Well, give them their assignment, Sir Dogberry."
"First, who think you the most desartless man to be constable?","First, which man do you think is most desertless By “desertless” (a made-up word), he means “deserving.” desertless to be leader of the watch?"
"Hugh Otecake, sir, or George Seacole, for they can write","Either Hugh Otecake, sir, or else George Seacole, because both of them can read and write."
"Come hither, neighbor Seacole. God hath blessed you with a good name. To be a well-favored man is the gift of fortune, but to write and read comes by nature.","Come here, Sir Seacole. God has blessed you with a good name. To be good-looking is a matter of luck, but to read and write is a natural gift."
"Both which, Master Constable—","Both of which, master constable—"
"favor, sir, why, give God thanks, and make no boast of it, and for your writing and reading, let that appear when there is no need of such vanity. You are thought here to be the most senseless and fit man for the constable of the watch;","You have. I knew that would be your answer. Well, for your good looks, sir, thank God and don’t boast about it. As for your reading and writing, use those skills when you can’t use your looks. You’re thought to be the most senseless By “senseless,” he means “sensible.” senseless and fit man here, so you will carry the lantern and be constable. This is your assignment:"
"you shall comprehend all vagrom men; you are to bid any man stand, in the Prince’s name.","you will comprehend By “comprehend,” he means “apprehend.” comprehend any vagrant men you see. You are to order all men to stop, in the Prince’s name."
How if he will not stand?,And what if he won’t stop?
"Why, then, take no note of him, but let him go and you are rid of a knave.","Well then, don’t bother with him and let him go. Then immediately call the rest of the watch together and thank God that you’ve gotten rid of such a criminal."
"If he will not stand when he is bidden, he is none of the Prince’s subjects.","If he won’t stop when he’s told to, then he isn’t one of the Prince’s subjects."
"True, and they are to meddle with none but the Prince’s for the watch to babble and to talk is most tolerable and not to be endured.","True, and you aren’t supposed to meddle with anyone but the Prince’s subjects. You will also stay quiet in the streets, for a babbling watch is most tolerable By “tolerable,” he means “intolerable.” tolerable and will not be endured."
We will rather sleep than talk. We know what belongs to a watch.,We’ll sleep instead of talk. We know what’s appropriate for a watch.
"for I cannot see how sleeping should offend. Only have a care that your bills be not stolen. Well, you are to call at all the alehouses and bid those that are drunk get them to bed.","Why, you speak like an experienced and quiet watchman. Sleeping on the watch shouldn’t be a problem; just make sure that your weapons don’t get stolen. Also, you’re supposed to visit all the bars and tell anyone who’s drunk to go home and go to bed."
How if they will not?,And what if they won’t go?
"you not then the better answer, you may say they are not the men you took them for.","Well then, leave them alone until they’re sober. If even then they don’t answer to your satisfaction, you can say that they’re not the men you thought they were."
"Well, sir.","Very good, sir."
"If you meet a thief, you may suspect him, by virtue of your you meddle or make with them, why the more is for your honesty.","If you meet a thief, you can expect him to be dishonest. The less you have to do with that kind of man, the more honest you will be."
"If we know him to be a thief, shall we not lay hands on him?","So if we know that a man is a thief, should we try to arrest him?"
"Truly, by your office you may, but I think they that touch you do take a thief, is to let him show himself what he is and steal out of your company.","Your position permits you to, but I think that those who stick their hands in pitch Pitch is a dark sticky, tar-like substance. pitch get their hands dirty. If you encounter a thief, I think the most peaceable thing to do is to let him be himself—and steal away."
"You have been always called a merciful man, partner.","You have always been known as a merciful man, partner."
who hath any honesty in him.,"Truly, I wouldn’t even hang a dog, much more By “more,” he means “less.” more a man who has any honesty in him."
"(to the Watch) If you hear a child cry in the night, you must call to the nurse and bid her still it.","(to the watchmen) If you hear a child crying in the night, you should call the nurse and tell her to quiet the child."
How if the nurse be asleep and will not hear us?,What if the nurse is asleep and doesn’t hear us?
"crying, for the ewe that will not hear her lamb when it baas will never answer a calf when he bleats.","Well then, leave quietly, and let the child’s crying wake up the nurse. The ewe that doesn’t go to her lamb when it baas will never tend to another animal’s child."
'Tis very true.,That’s very true.
"This is the end of the charge. You, constable, are to present you may stay him.","And that’s the end of your assignment. You, constable, are representing the Prince himself. If you meet the Prince in the night, you can order him to stop."
"Nay, by 'r Lady, that I think he cannot.","No, by our Lady, I don’t think he can."
"Five shillings to one on ’t, with any man that knows the statutes, he may stay him—marry, not without the Prince and it is an offense to stay a man against his will.","I’ll bet any man who knows the law five shillings to one on it. Truly though, you can’t stop the Prince without the Prince’s consent, for the watch shouldn’t offend anyone, and it’s an offense to keep a man without his consent."
"By 'r lady, I think it be so.","By our Lady, I think that’s true."
"Ha, ha, ha!—Well, masters, good night. An there be any matter of weight chances, call up me. Keep your fellows'","Ha, ha, ha! Well, gentlemen, good night. And if anything important happens, find me and let me know. Keep each other’s secrets and your own. Good night. Come, friend."
"Well, masters, we hear our charge. Let us go sit here upon the church bench till two, and then all to bed.","Well gentlemen, we’ve heard our assignment. Let’s sit here on the church bench until two and then go off to bed."
"One word more, honest neighbors. I pray you watch about Signior Leonato’s door, for the wedding being there I beseech you.","One more thing, good gentlemen. Watch over Signior Leonato’s house; with the wedding being held there tomorrow, there’s a great to-do there tonight. Adieu. Be vigitant By “vigitant,” he means “vigilant.” vigitant , I beg you."
What Conrade!,Conrade!
(aside) Peace! Stir not.,(whispering) Quiet! Don’t move!
"Conrade, I say!","Conrade, I say!"
"Here, man. I am at thy elbow.","I’m here, man, at your elbow."
"Mass, and my elbow itched, I thought there would a scab follow.","Come to think of it, I thought I felt a scab there."
I will owe thee an answer for that. And now forward with thy tale.,I’ll get you for that. Now get on with your story.
"rain, and I will, like a true drunkard, utter all to thee.","Since it’s drizzling, stand under this overhang with me and, like a true drunk, I’ll tell you everything."
"(aside) Some treason, masters. Yet stand close.","(speaking so that only the other WATCHMEN can hear) There’s some treason occurring, gentlemen. Stay here."
Therefore know I have earned of Don John a thousand ducats.,You should know I’ve earned a thousand gold pieces from Don John.
Is it possible that any villainy should be so dear?,Is it possible that any crime could be so valuable?
"Thou shouldst rather ask if it were possible any villainy should be so rich. For when rich villains have need of poor ones, poor ones may make what price they will.","You should ask instead if it’s possible that any criminal could be so rich. Because when rich villains need poor villains' services, those poor ones can name the price."
I wonder at it.,I can’t believe it.
"fashion of a doublet, or a hat, or a cloak, is nothing to a man.",That only proves how inexperienced you are. You know that the style of a man’s jacket or hat or coat means nothing.
"Yes, it is apparel.","Yes, it’s just clothing."
I mean the fashion.,"No, I mean, the fashion of a man’s clothing tells us nothing about the man."
"Yes, the fashion is the fashion.","Yes, fashion is fashion."
what a deformed thief this fashion is?,"C’mon, I might as well say the fool’s the fool! But don’t you see what a deformed “Deformed” here means “deforming.” deformed villain fashion is?"
(aside) I know that Deformed. He has been a vile thief this seven year. He goes up and down like a gentleman. I remember his name.,"(speaking so that only the other WATCHMEN can hear) I know that man, Deformed The watchman thinks that “Deformed” is the name of one of the criminals. Deformed . For the past seven years, he’s been a wicked thief. He walks around as if he were a gentleman. I remember that name."
Didst thou not hear somebody?,Did you hear someone?
"No, ’twas the vane on the house.",Just the weathervane moving.
"Seest thou not, I say, what a deformed thief this fashion is, how giddily he turns about all the hot bloods between fourteen and five-and-thirty, sometimes fashioning them like god Bel’s priests in the old church-window, sometime like the shaven Hercules in the smirched worm-eaten tapestry, where his codpiece seems as massy as his club?","As I was saying, fashion is a deformed villain. It makes hot-blooded young men spin around feverishly, forever changing their appearances, dictating that sometimes they dress like Pharoah’s soldiers in that grimy painting and sometimes like the priests of the god Baal, as seen in old church windows. And sometimes fashion dresses them like the great Hercules in that dirty, worm-eaten tapestry—the one where his codpiece A codpiece was a pouch, sometimes stuffed and decorated, worn over pants and covering a man’s genitals. codpiece seems almost as big as his club."
"All this I see, and I see that the fashion wears out more the fashion too, that thou hast shifted out of thy tale into telling me of the fashion?","I get all this. And I also understand how fashion changes so quickly that a man’s clothing never gets a chance to wear itself out. But you’re all wound up about fashion, too. Otherwise, why would you stray from your story to blabber on about it?"
"Not so, neither. But know that I have tonight wooed Margaret, the Lady Hero’s gentlewoman, by the name of bids me a thousand times good night. I tell this tale vilely. I should first tell thee how the Prince, Claudio and my master, planted and placed and possessed by my master Don John, saw afar off in the orchard this amiable","No, I’m not wound up. But I will tell you that I seduced Margaret, the Lady Hero’s waiting woman, tonight. I called her “Hero” the whole time. She leaned out of her mistress’s bedroom window and told me good night a thousand times—but I am telling this story poorly. I should backtrack and begin with how my master, Don John, arranged for the Prince, Claudio, and himself to witness this friendly encounter from the orchard."
And thought they Margaret was Hero?,And they thought Margaret was Hero?
"Two of them did, the Prince and Claudio, but the devil my master knew she was Margaret; and partly by his oaths, which first possessed them, partly by the dark night, which confirm any slander that Don John had made, away went Claudio enraged, swore he would meet her as he was appointed next morning at the temple, and there, before the whole congregation, shame her with what he saw o'ernight","The Prince and Claudio did, but the devil, my master, knew that it was Margaret. They believed the charade partially because of my master’s testimony—which first caused them to doubt Hero—and partially because of how dark and deceiving the night was, but mostly because of my villainous actions, which confirmed Don John’s slander. Claudio went away enraged, swearing that he’d meet Hero at the temple as planned and there, before the entire congregation, shame her with what he’d discovered and send her home without a husband."
"We charge you, in the Prince’s name, stand!","We charge you, in the Prince’s name, to stop!"
Call up the right Master Constable. We have here recovered the most dangerous piece of lechery that ever was known in the commonwealth.,Call up the Master Constable Dogberry. We have recovered recovered=discovered; lechery=treachery recovered the most dangerous piece of lechery that was ever known in the commonwealth.
lock.,And one of them is the criminal Deformed. I know him; he wears a lock of hair.
"Masters, masters—","Gentlemen, gentlemen—"
"(to BORACHIO) You’ll be made bring Deformed forth, I warrant you.",(to BORACHIO) I bet you’ll be forced to bring Deformed forward.
with us.,"Gentlemen, don’t speak. We obey obey = order obey you to go with us."
"We are like to prove a goodly commodity, being taken up of these men’s bills.",We’re probably a very valuable catch for these guys.
"A commodity in question, I warrant you.—Come, we’ll","Well, our value is debatable, I bet. Let’s go, we’ll obey you."
"Good Ursula, wake my cousin Beatrice and desire her to rise.","Good Ursula, go wake my cousin and ask her to get up."
"I will, lady.","I will, lady."
And bid her come hither.,And request that she come here.
Well.,Very well.
"Troth, I think your other rebato were better.","Really, I think your other ruff is better."
"No, pray thee, good Meg, I’ll wear this.","No, please good Meg, I’ll wear this one."
"By my troth, ’s not so good, and I warrant your cousin will say so.","Honestly, it’s not as good as the other one, and I’m sure your cousin will agree with me."
this.,"My cousin’s a fool, and you are too. I’ll wear this one and none other."
"I like the new tire within excellently, if the hair were a thought browner; and your gown’s a most rare fashion, i' faith. I saw the Duchess of Milan’s gown that they praise so.","I like your new wig and headdress, though I’d like it more if the hair were a shade browner. And your gown is really stylish. You know, I saw the Duchess of Milan’s gown, the one that everyone praises so highly."
"Oh, that exceeds, they say.","Oh, they say that dress surpasses all others."
"By my troth, ’s but a nightgown in respect of yours—cloth o' gold, and cuts, and laced with silver, set with pearls, down sleeves, side sleeves, and skirts, round underborne with a bluish tinsel. But for a fine, quaint, graceful, and","Compared to your dress, it’s no better than a nightgown. The cloth is interwoven with gold thread, and slashes in the material show the fabric beneath. It is trimmed with silver lace and embroidered with pearls. It has one set of fitted sleeves and another ornamental pair that hangs open from the shoulders. The skirts are trimmed with a blue, metallic fabric. But for a fine, elegant, graceful, and excellent dress, yours is worth ten of those."
"God give me joy to wear it, for my heart is exceeding heavy.","I hope I enjoy wearing it, for my heart is very heavy."
'Twill be heavier soon by the weight of a man.,It will be made even heavier soon—by the weight of a man.
Fie upon thee! Art not ashamed?,Watch your tongue! Have you no shame?
"Of what, lady? Of speaking honorably? Is not marriage marriage? I think you would have me say, “Saving your reverence, a husband.” An bad thinking do not wrest true speaking, I’ll offend nobody. Is there any harm in “the heavier for a husband”? None, I think, an it be the right heavy. Ask my Lady Beatrice else. Here she comes.","Shame of what, lady? Sex and marriage are honorable things—even for a beggar, right? And isn’t your husband an honorable man? You’re so prudish you’d probably like me to say, “I beg your pardon, your husband”—as if husband were a dirty word! So long as suspicious minds aren’t misinterpreting my honest words, I’ll offend no one. What’s wrong with admitting your husband’s going to lie on you? Nothing, as long as it’s the right husband with the right wife. That’s right and proper—anything else is frivolous and immoral. Ask Beatrice. Here she comes."
"Good morrow, coz.","Good morning, cousin."
"Good morrow, sweet Hero.","Good morning, sweet Hero."
"Why, how now? Do you speak in the sick tune?",Why do you sound so odd? Are you ill? You sound out of tune.
"I am out of all other tune, methinks.",I must be ill—I don’t think I can speak in any other tune.
"Clap ’s into “Light o' love.” That goes without a burden. Do you sing it, and I’ll dance it.","If it’s a tune we want, let’s sing “Light on Love!” It’s a light song and doesn’t require a man to sing the baritone. You sing, and I’ll dance."
"Ye light o' love, with your heels! Then, if your husband have stables enough, you’ll see he shall lack no barns.","You’re “light on love” sure enough—your frivolous dancing proves you have light heels! When you’re married one of these days, if your husband is rolling in dough, you’ll let him roll in the hay whenever he wants."
O illegitimate construction! I scorn that with my heels.,Never! I reject that life; I kick it away with my heels “Light-heeled” is slang for sexually loose. heels .
"'Tis almost five o'clock, cousin. 'Tis time you were ready. By my troth, I am exceeding ill. Heigh-ho!","(to HERO) It’s almost five o'clock, cousin. You should be ready by now. Oh, I really don’t feel well. Heigh-ho!"
"For a hawk, a horse, or a husband?","Are you sighing for a hawk, a horse, or a husband?"
"For the letter that begins them all, H.",I have an ache; I’m sighing for the letter that begins all those words.
the star.,"Well, if you haven’t renounced The word “ache” was once pronoun-ced like the letter h. renounced your old faith yet, we can’t trust anything anymore."
"What means the fool, trow?","What does the fool mean by that, I wonder?"
"Nothing, I; but God send everyone their heart’s desire.",I don’t mean anything—but God sends everyone their heart’s desire.
"These gloves the Count sent me, they are an excellent",The Count sent me an excellent pair of perfumed gloves.
"I am stuffed, cousin. I cannot smell.","Sorry, I’m all stuffed. I can’t smell a thing."
"A maid, and stuffed! There’s goodly catching of cold.","Oh, just a young lady and already stuffed! Margaret makes an obscene pun on the word “stuffed.” stuffed! That’s a nice way to catch a cold."
"Oh, God help me, God help me! How long have you professed apprehension?","Oh, God help me! Since when have you claimed to be such a great wit?"
Even since you left it. Doth not my wit become me rarely?,Ever since you lost yours. Doesn’t my wit suit me well?
"It is not seen enough; you should wear it in your cap. By my troth, I am sick.","It doesn’t get seen enough; you should wear it in your cap, the way fools wear coxcombs. God, I’m really sick."
Get you some of this distilled carduus benedictus and lay it to your heart. It is the only thing for a qualm.,"You should get some distilled carduus benedictus carduus benedictus = holy thistle, a medicinal herb good for the heart. carduus benedictus and put it on your chest. It’s the only way to cure a sudden faintness."
There thou prick’st her with a thistle.,With that you’ve managed to prick her with a thistle.
Benedictus! Why benedictus? You have some moral in this benedictus?,"Benedictus! Why do you suggest I use benedictus? Is there some double meaning in that word, “benedictus”?"
"Moral! No, by my troth, I have no moral meaning. I meant plain holy thistle. You may think perchance that I think you what I list, nor I list not to think what I can, nor indeed I cannot think, if I would think my heart out of thinking, that you are in love or that you will be in love or that you can be in love. Yet Benedick was such another, and now is he now, in despite of his heart, he eats his meat without grudging. And how you may be converted I know not, but methinks you look with your eyes as other women do.","Double meaning! No, honestly, there’s no other meaning. I just meant that you should use some holy thistle. Maybe you think that I think you’re in love. No, by Our Lady, I’m not such a fool to think what I please, and I don’t please to think what I can, and in fact I cannot think, even if I could think my heart right past thinking, that you are in love or that you will be in love or even that you can be in love. But Benedick was once an enemy of love as well, and now he’s become a real man. He swore that he’d never get married, but now, despite his earlier protestations, he loves ungrudgingly. How we’re going to convert you I’ll never know. And yet I think you look with your eyes just like every other woman does."
What pace is this that thy tongue keeps?,Why are you talking at such a crazy clip?
Not a false gallop.,"It’s not a false gallop, anyway."
"Madam, withdraw: the Prince, the Count, Signor Benedick, Don John, and all the gallants of the town are come to fetch you to church.","Madam, we have to go: the Prince, the Count, Signior Benedick, Don John, and all the gentlemen of the town have come to bring you to church."
"Help to dress me, good coz, good Meg, good Ursula.","Good cousin, good Meg, good Ursula, come help me get dressed."
"What would you with me, honest neighbor?","What do you want from me, my good man?"
"Marry, sir, I would have some confidence with you that decerns you nearly.","Please, sir, I would like to discuss some news that decerns “Decerns” is a mistake for “concerns.” decerns you greatly."
"Brief, I pray you, for you see it is a busy time with me.","Be brief, please, because, as you can see, this is a busy time for me."
"Marry, this it is, sir.","Indeed, sir, it is."
"Yes, in truth it is, sir.","Yes, it truly is."
"What is it, my good friends?","What’s the news, my good friends?"
"Goodman Verges, sir, speaks a little off the matter. An old man, sir, and his wits are not so blunt as, God help, I would his brows.","Sorry, sir, Goodman Verges tends to ramble. He’s an old man, sir, and his wits are not as blunt “Blunt” is a mistake for “sharp.” blunt as I wish they were. But truly, he’s as honest as the skin between his brows."
"Yes, I thank God I am as honest as any man living that is an old man and no honester than I.","Yes, I thank God that I am as honest as all the other old men who are not honester than me."
"Comparisons are odorous. Palabras, neighbor Verges.","Making comparisons is odorous “Odorous” is a mistake for “odious” (hateful). odorous , Verges. Get on with your story."
"Neighbors, you are tedious.","Friends, you are becoming tedious."
"It pleases your Worship to say so, but we are the poor duke’s officers. But truly, for mine own part, if I were as tedious as a king, I could find it in my heart to bestow it all of your worship.","Thank you for saying that, your Worship, but we’re just the poor duke’s officers. But truly, if I were as tedious Dogberry takes “tedious” to mean “rich.” tedious as a king, I would give everything to you, your Worship."
"All thy tediousness on me, ah?","Oh, so you’d give me all your tediousness?"
"Yea, an ’twere a thousand pound more than ’tis, for I hear as good exclamation on your Worship as of any man in the city, and though I be but a poor man, I am glad to hear it.","Yes, even if I had a thousand more pounds than that, for I hear that you are exclaimed “Exclaimed” is a mistake for “acclaimed.” exclaimed throughout the city, and though I am only a poor man, it makes me glad to hear it."
And so am I.,"Me, too."
I would fain know what you have to say.,"Gentlemen, please, I’d like to hear your news."
"Marry, sir, our watch tonight, excepting your Worship’s presence, ha' ta'en a couple of as arrant knaves as any in Messina.","Sir, our watch tonight— expectfully “Expectfully” is a mistake for “respectfully.” expectfully , sir—has captured a couple of the worst criminals in Messina."
"A good old man, sir. He will be talking. As they say, “When Well said, i' faith, neighbor Verges.—Well, God’s a good man. An two men ride of a horse, one must ride behind. An honest soul, i' faith, sir, by my troth he is, as ever broke bread, but God is to be worshipped, all men are not alike,","(to LEONATO) Verges is a good old man, sir, but he’s always babbling. Like they say, “When age comes, wit goes.” God help us, what a world! (to VERGES) You did well, Verges, honestly. (to LEONATO) Well, God’s a fair man. If two men are riding on one horse, one must naturally ride behind. Verges is as honest a man as any, but, God bless him, not all men are created equal. Am I right, my friend?"
"Indeed, neighbor, he comes too short of you.","Truly, my friend, he isn’t nearly as impressive as you are."
Gifts that God gives.,God gives those gifts—I had nothing to do with it.
I must leave you.,Now I must return to the wedding.
"One word, sir. Our watch, sir, have indeed comprehended morning examined before your worship.","One more thing, sir. Our watch, sir, as you know, has comprehended “Comprehended” is a mistake for “apprehended”; “auspicious” is a mistake for “suspicious.” comprehended two auspicious persons. We’d like for you to examine them this morning."
"Take their examination yourself and bring it me. I am now in great haste, as it may appear unto you.","Examine them yourselves, then bring me your findings. Now I’m in a great hurry, as I’m sure you can see."
It shall be suffigance.,That will be suffigance “Suffigance” is a mistake for “sufficient.” suffigance .
Drink some wine ere you go. Fare you well.,Have some wine before you go. Goodbye.
"My lord, they stay for you to give your daughter to her husband.","My lord, they’re waiting for you to give your daughter away to Claudio."
I’ll wait upon them. I am ready.,I’m coming.
"Go, good partner, go, get you to Francis Seacole. Bid him examination these men.","Go to Francis Seacole, the constable of the watch. Tell him to bring his pen and his inkwell to the jail. We will now go to examination “Examination” is mistake for “examine.” examination these men."
And we must do it wisely.,We must do this wisely.
"We will spare for no wit, I warrant you. Here’s that shall drive some of them to a noncome. Only get the learned the jail.","We won’t hold back any of our wisdom. We’ll drive them to a noncome “Noncome” is a mistake for “outcome”; “excommunication” is a mistake for “examination.” noncome . Go get the educated writer to record our excommunication, and I’ll meet you at the jail."
"Come, Friar Francis, be brief, only to the plain form of marriage, and you shall recount their particular duties afterwards.","All right, Friar Francis, let’s keep this short. Do a simple ceremony, and list all the particular duties of marriage later."
"(to CLAUDIO) You come hither, my lord, to marry this lady?","(to CLAUDIO) Have you come here, my lord, to marry this lady?"
No.,No.
"To be married to her.—Friar, you come to marry her.","No, he comes to be married to her. Friar, you are the one who has come to marry her."
"Lady, you come hither to be married to this count?","Lady, do you come here to be married to this count?"
I do.,I do.
If either of you know any inward impediment why you it.,"If either of you knows any secret reason why you two should not be joined in marriage, I order you on your souls to say so."
"Know you any, Hero?","Do you know any, Hero?"
"None, my lord.","None, my lord."
"Know you any, count?","Do you know any, count?"
"I dare make his answer, none.","I’m sure I can answer for him—he doesn’t know any, either."
"O, what men dare do! What men may do! What men daily do, not knowing what they do!","Oh, the things men dare to do! The things men are allowed to do! The things men do daily, not knowing what they’re doing!"
"How now, interjections? Why, then, some be of laughing, as, ah, ha, he!","What, are we playing with interjections? Well then, add some interjections that indicate laughter, like “ah,” “ha,” and “he!” Benedick is jokingly referring to a passage from a popular Latin grammar book of the day. “ah,” “ha,” and “he!”"
"Will you with free and unconstrainèd soul Give me this maid, your daughter?","Hold on, Friar. (to LEONATO) Father, are you giving me your daughter freely?"
"As freely, son, as God did give her me.","As freely, son, as God gave her to me."
And what have I to give you back whose worth,And what should I give you that would be equal in value to this rare and precious gift?
"Nothing, unless you render her again.","Nothing, sir, except grandchildren."
"Sweet Prince, you learn me noble thankfulness.— There, Leonato, take her back again. Give not this rotten orange to your friend. Behold how like a maid she blushes here! Oh, what authority and show of truth Can cunning sin cover itself withal! Comes not that blood as modest evidence All you that see her, that she were a maid By these exterior shows? But she is none. She knows the heat of a luxurious bed. Her blush is guiltiness, not modesty.","Good Prince, you have taught me how to accept things nobly. There, Leonato, take your daughter back. Don’t insult a friend by giving him a beautiful orange that rots inside. She only appears honorable from the outside. Look, how she blushes like a virgin! Oh, sin can disguise itself so artfully! Doesn’t that rising blush suggest that she is virtuous and innocent? All of you who are looking at her, wouldn’t you swear that she’s a virgin, judging by these outward shows? But she is no virgin. She has been in a man’s bed. She blushes from guilt, not modesty."
"What do you mean, my lord?","What do you mean, my lord?"
"Not to be married, Not to knit my soul to an approvèd wanton.",I won’t be married. I won’t join my soul to such a proven slut.
"Dear my lord, if you in your own proof Have vanquished the resistance of her youth And made defeat of her virginity—","My dear lord, if it was you who conquered her and took her virginity—"
"You will say she did embrace me as a husband, And so extenuate the forehand sin. No, Leonato, I never tempted her with word too large Bashful sincerity and comely love.","I know what you’re about to say. If I had slept with her, you’d say that we did so as husband and wife, merely anticipating our eventual marriage. No, Leonato. I never seduced her, or tempted her with indecent words. I treated her like a brother would treat a sister, with modest sincerity and appropriate affection."
And seemed I ever otherwise to you?,And have I ever seemed less than modest or appropriate to you?
"Out on thee, seeming! I will write against it. You seem to me as Dian in her orb, But you are more intemperate in your blood Than Venus, or those pampered animals That rage in savage sensuality.","Curse you for your false appearances! To me, you seemed like Diana Diana was the virgin goddess of the hunt and moon; Venus was the goddess of love generally portrayed as fickle and promiscuous. Diana in her orbit—as virginal as the flower bud before it blooms. But you’re actually as hot-blooded as Venus, or a pampered animal allowed to run wild."
"Is my lord well, that he doth speak so wide?","Are you sick, my lord? Is that why you’re talking so wildly?"
"Sweet Prince, why speak not you?","Good Prince, say something!"
"What should I speak? I stand dishonored, that have gone about To link my dear friend to a common stale.",What should I say? I’ve been dishonored: I arranged for a friend of mine to marry a common whore.
"Are these things spoken, or do I but dream?","Are you really saying these things, or am I dreaming?"
"Sir, they are spoken, and these things are true.","They’re really being spoken, sir, and they’re true."
This looks not like a nuptial.,This doesn’t look like a wedding.
True! O God!,It’s true! Oh God!
"Leonato, stand I here? Is this the Prince? Is this the Prince’s brother? Is this face Hero’s? Are our eyes our own?","Leonato, am I standing here? Is this the Prince? Is this the Prince’s brother? Is this face Hero’s? Are these our eyes?"
"All this is so, but what of this, my lord?","Yes, that’s all true—but what do you mean by it, my lord?"
"Let me but move one question to your daughter, And by that fatherly and kindly power That you have in her, bid her answer truly.","Let me just ask her one question, and by your authority as her father, order her to answer truthfully."
"I charge thee do so, as thou art my child.","As my child, I order you to do so."
What kind of catechizing call you this?,"Oh, God help me! How I’m being attacked! What kind of game is this?"
To make you answer truly to your name.,We just want you to answer to your real name.
Is it not Hero? Who can blot that name With any just reproach?,Isn’t my name Hero? Who can stain that name with a just accusation?
"Marry, that can Hero! What man was he talked with you yesternight Out at your window betwixt twelve and one? Now, if you are a maid, answer to this.","Indeed, Hero herself can! You’ve stained your virtue with your own actions. What man were you talking to at your window last night, between the hours of midnight and one? If you’re a virgin, you’ll answer this question."
"I talked with no man at that hour, my lord.","I wasn’t talking to any man at that time, my lord."
"I am sorry you must hear. Upon mine honor, Myself, my brother, and this grievèd count Did see her, hear her, at that hour last night Talk with a ruffian at her chamber window Confessed the vile encounters they have had A thousand times in secret.","Well then, you are no virgin. Leonato, I’m sorry you have to hear this. I swear on my honor that we saw and heard Hero talking to a brute at her window last night. And that man confessed at length how he has secretly come to her bedroom thousands of times."
"Fie, fie, they are not to be named, my lord, Not to be spoke of! Without offense, to utter them.—Thus, pretty lady, I am sorry for thy much misgovernment.","No, my lord, don’t name her sinful acts or speak of them! There’s no way to describe them without offending everyone here. Pretty lady, I’m much ashamed of your shocking behavior."
"O Hero, what a Hero hadst thou been If half thy outward graces had been placed But fare thee well, most foul, most fair! Farewell, Thou pure impiety and impious purity. For thee I’ll lock up all the gates of love, And on my eyelids shall conjecture hang, And never shall it more be gracious.","Oh Hero, you could have equaled the mythical Hero The mythical Hero, who died for her lover, Leander, was considered the model of perfect love. mythical Hero if only half your outward beauty matched your inner thoughts and desires! Goodbye, beautiful sinner. Goodbye to your pure wickedness and your wicked purity. Because of you, I’ll keep myself away from love. I’ll hang suspicion on my eyelids, so that all the beautiful things I see are transformed into dangers and are never able to trick me again."
Hath no man’s dagger here a point for me?,Does anyone have a dagger for me?
"Why, how now, cousin! wherefore sink you down?","What’s wrong, cousin? Why have you collapsed?"
"Come, let us go. These things, come thus to light,","Come, let’s go. These revelations have overwhelmed her."
How doth the lady?,How is she?
"Dead, I think.—Help, uncle!— Hero, why, Hero! Uncle! Signor Benedick! Friar!","She’s dead, I think.—Help, uncle!—Hero, why Hero! Uncle! Signior Benedick! Friar!"
O Fate! Take not away thy heavy hand! Death is the fairest cover for her shame,"Oh Fate, don’t spare Hero from being punished! Death is the best way to cover over her shame."
"How now, cousin Hero!","How are you, Hero?"
"(to HERO) Have comfort, lady.","(to HERO) Take comfort, lady."
(to HERO) Dost thou look up?,(to HERO) Are you looking up?
"Yea, wherefore should she not?","Yes, why shouldn’t she?"
"Wherefore! Why, doth not every earthly thing The story that is printed in her blood?— Do not live, Hero, do not ope thine eyes, For, did I think thou wouldst not quickly die, Thought I thy spirits were stronger than thy shames, Strike at thy life. Grieved I I had but one? Chid I for that at frugal Nature’s frame? O, one too much by thee! Why had I one? Why ever wast thou lovely in my eyes? Took up a beggar’s issue at my gates, Who, smirchèd thus, and mired with infamy, I might have said, “No part of it is mine; This shame derives itself from unknown loins”?","Why not! Isn’t every living thing condemning her? Can she deny the accusations that are proven by her guilty blush? Die, Hero, don’t open your eyes. If I didn’t think you were about to die soon—if I thought your spirit could bear this shame—I would risk punishment and kill you myself. Am I sorry that I only had one child? Do I blame Nature for being so thrifty? Oh, one child is one too many! Why did I ever have one? Why did you once seem lovely to me? Why didn’t I just adopt a beggar’s child left at my doorstep, whose shame and dishonor I could have denied, not being its true father? But you were mine, and I loved and praised you for being mine, and was proud of you for being mine—I loved you so much that I hardly cared about myself."
"And mine that I was proud on, mine so much That I myself was to myself not mine, Valuing of her—why, she, O she is fall'n Into a pit of ink, that the wide sea And salt too little which may season give To her foul tainted flesh!","Oh, but now you have fallen into a pit of ink, and there’s not enough water in the whole wide sea to wash you clean again, and not enough salt to cover your stink."
"Sir, sir, be patient. For my part, I am so attired in wonder I know not what to say.","Sir, sir, calm down. I’m so amazed by this, I don’t know what to say."
"Oh, on my soul, my cousin is belied!","Oh, on my soul, my cousin has been slandered falsely!"
"Lady, were you her bedfellow last night?","Lady, did you sleep in her room last night?"
"No, truly not, although until last night I have this twelvemonth been her bedfellow.","No, I didn’t, but I did every night for the past year."
"Confirmed, confirmed! Oh, that is stronger made Would the two princes lie and Claudio lie, Who loved her so that, speaking of her foulness, Washed it with tears? Hence from her. Let her die.","Then it’s confirmed! That’s even more proof, and the case against her was airtight already. Would the two princes and Claudio lie? Claudio, who loved her so much that talking about her wickedness made him weep?"
"Hear me a little, And given way unto this course of fortune, By noting of the lady. I have marked A thousand blushing apparitions To start into her face, a thousand innocent shames And in her eye there hath appeared a fire To burn the errors that these princes hold Against her maiden truth. Call me a fool,","Listen to me a moment. I’ve only remained silent this whole time because I’ve been watching Hero. I’ve seen her begin to blush a thousand times, only to watch those blushes disappear a thousand times and an innocent paleness take over her face. And in her eyes I see a fire that would seem to burn away the lies the princes have told about her chastity. Call me a fool,  don’t trust my observations—the truth of which is backed up by all my years of experience—don’t trust my age, my reputation, my position, and my holiness."
"Trust not my reading nor my observations, The tenor of my book; trust not my age, My reverence, calling, nor divinity, If this sweet lady lie not guiltless here Under some biting error.",You can doubt all these things if this sweet lady turns out to be guilty.
"Friar, it cannot be. Is that she will not add to her damnation A sin of perjury. She not denies it. Why seek’st thou then to cover with excuse That which appears in proper nakedness?","But she must be, Friar. You see that any morals she has left are preventing her from denying the charges: she doesn’t want to add perjury to her list of sins."
"Lady, what man is he you are accused of?","Lady, who do they accuse you of having taken as your lover?"
"They know that do accuse me. I know none. If I know more of any man alive Than that which maiden modesty doth warrant, Let all my sins lack mercy!—O my father, At hours unmeet, or that I yesternight Maintained the change of words with any creature, Refuse me, hate me, torture me to death!","You should ask them. I don’t know who they’re talking about. If I’ve been with a man in any improper way, let all my sins be punished! Oh, father, if you yourself can prove that I talked with a man at an indecent hour, or indeed that I spoke to any creature last night, you can disown me, hate me, and torture me to death!"
There is some strange misprision in the princes.,The princes are under some strange misunderstanding.
"And if their wisdoms be misled in this, The practice of it lives in John the Bastard, Whose spirits toil in frame of villainies.","Two of them are completely honorable, and if they have been tricked in this, we must blame John the Bastard, who lives to create conflict."
"I know not. If they speak but truth of her, The proudest of them shall well hear of it. Time hath not yet so dried this blood of mine Nor age so eat up my invention Nor fortune made such havoc of my means But they shall find, awaked in such a kind, Both strength of limb and policy of mind, Ability in means and choice of friends, To quit me of them throughly.","I don’t know. If they have spoken the truth about Hero, I will tear her apart with my bare hands. But if they have accused her falsely, even the greatest of them will have to deal with me. Age hasn’t dried up my body or eroded my intelligence so much, and luck hasn’t robbed me of so much of my fortune, and my bad ways haven’t deprived me of so many friends, that they won’t find me ready to seek revenge both physically and mentally, with money and friends at my disposal."
"Pause awhile, Your daughter here the princes left for dead. Let her awhile be secretly kept in And publish it that she is dead indeed. Maintain a mourning ostentation, Hang mournful epitaphs and do all rites That appertain unto a burial.","Hold on a moment, and listen to my advice. The princes left your daughter here for dead. Hide her for a while in your house, and tell everyone that she has, in fact, died. Make a bug show of mourning for her, hang sad epitaphs up at your family’s tomb, and perform all the appropriate burial ceremonies."
What shall become of this? What will this do?,Why should we do this? What will this do?
"Marry, this, well carried, shall on her behalf But not for that dream I on this strange course, But on this travail look for greater birth. She, dying, as it must so be maintained, Upon the instant that she was accused, Of every hearer. For it so falls out That what we have we prize not to the worth Whiles we enjoy it, but being lacked and lost, Why then we rack the value, then we find","Listen, if we do this correctly, the men who slandered Hero will feel remorse for her instead. That will be a good thing. But I have an even greater goal in mind. We’ll maintain that she died the instant she was accused, and everyone who hears this will grieve for her, pity her, and excuse her actions. That’s how it goes: we don’t value the things we have until we lose them, when we suddenly rack up their value and see  all the virtues we were blind to when they were alive and with us. That’s how Claudio will respond. When he hears that she died from his words, his imagination will be sweetly overtaken by thoughts of her. In death, every aspect of her life will be got up more beautifully, and in his mind she will seem more moving, more delicate, and more lively even than when she was alive. Then, if he ever truly felt love, he’ll mourn and wish he hadn’t accused her—even though he believed his accu-"
"Whiles it was ours. So will it fare with Claudio. When he shall hear she died upon his words, The idea of her life shall sweetly creep Into his study of imagination, Shall come apparelled in more precious habit, More moving, delicate and full of life, Into the eye and prospect of his soul Than when she lived indeed. Then shall he mourn, And wish he had not so accused her, No, though he thought his accusation true. Let this be so, and doubt not but success Will fashion the event in better shape But if all aim but this be leveled false, The supposition of the lady’s death Will quench the wonder of her infamy. And if it sort not well, you may conceal her, In some reclusive and religious life, Out of all eyes, tongues, minds, and injuries.","sation to be true. Follow my plan, and trust that the actual events will play out even better than I am describing. And even if they don’t, at least Hero’s supposed death will stop the rumors of her infidelity. And if it doesn’t go well, then you can keep her hidden in a nunnery, the best place for someone with her kind of dirtied reputation—away from the public’s eyes, tongues, mind, and insults."
"Signior Leonato, let the friar advise you. And though you know my inwardness and love Yet, by mine honor, I will deal in this As secretly and justly as your soul Should with your body.","Signior Leonato, listen to the friar’s plan. And even though you know I’m very close to the Prince and Claudio, I swear I’ll keep your counsel and deal with this secretly and justly."
"Being that I flow in grief, The smallest twine may lead me.","Because I’m drowning in my grief, I’ll grab onto the smallest piece of string dangled in front of me."
"For to strange sores strangely they strain the cure.— Come, lady, die to live. This wedding day Perhaps is but prolonged. Have patience and endure.","This is a good agreement. Now, let’s go. A strange disease requires a strange cure. Come, lady; you must die in order to live. Hopefully, your wedding day is only postponed. Have patience and endure."
"Lady Beatrice, have you wept all this while?","Lady Beatrice, have you been crying this entire time?"
"Yea, and I will weep a while longer.","Yes, and I’ll keep crying a while longer."
I will not desire that.,I don’t wish that on you.
You have no reason. I do it freely.,You don’t have to; I do it of my own free will.
Surely I do believe your fair cousin is wronged.,I really believe your cousin was falsely accused.
"Ah, how much might the man deserve of me that would","Oh, the man who avenged her could ask anything of me!"
Is there any way to show such friendship?,Is there any way I could show such friendship to you?
"A very even way, but no such friend.","A very clear way, but there is no friend who will undertake it."
May a man do it?,Can a man do it?
"It is a man’s office, but not yours.","It’s a job meant for a man, but not you."
strange?,There is nothing in the world that I love as much as you. Isn’t that strange?
"As strange as the thing I know not. It were as possible for me to say I loved nothing so well as you, but believe me not, and yet I lie not, I confess nothing, nor I deny nothing. I am","It’s as strange as this other thing which I don’t understand. I could just as easily say that there is nothing in the world that I love as much as you. But don’t believe me—though I’m not lying. I confess nothing, and I deny nothing. I feel awful for my cousin."
"By my sword, Beatrice, thou lovest me.","By my sword, Beatrice, you love me."
"Do not swear, and eat it.","Don’t swear like that and then go back and eat it Beatrice means “eat your words” (i.e., go back on your pledge to love me). eat it later."
"I will swear by it that you love me, and I will make him eat it that says I love not you.","I’ll swear by my sword …but Benedick takes it to mean “eat your sword.” sword that you love me, too, and I’ll make any man who says that I don’t love you eat it."
Will you not eat your word?,But you won’t eat your words?
With no sauce that can be devised to it. I protest I love thee.,"Not with any sauce they could provide for them. I swear, I love you."
"Why then, God forgive me.","Well then, God forgive me!"
"What offense, sweet Beatrice?","Why, what have you done, sweet Beatrice?"
You have stayed me in a happy hour. I was about to protest,You got to me first. I was about to swear that I loved you.
And do it with all thy heart.,"Then do so, with all your heart."
I love you with so much of my heart that none is left to protest.,I love you with so much of my heart that none of it is left to protest with.
"Come, bid me do anything for thee.","Come, ask me to do anything for you."
Kill Claudio.,Kill Claudio.
Ha! Not for the wide world.,Ha! I wouldn’t do that for the whole wide world.
You kill me to deny it. Farewell.,"Then, rejecting my request, you kill me, instead. Goodbye."
"Tarry, sweet Beatrice.","Wait, sweet Beatrice."
"I am gone, though I am here. There is no love in you. Nay,","My body waits here, but the rest of me is gone. You don’t really love me. I beg you to let me go."
Beatrice—,Beatrice—
"In faith, I will go.","I swear, I’m going."
We’ll be friends first.,Not until we part as friends.
You dare easier be friends with me than fight with mine,How dare you try to be my friend when you refuse to fight my enemy.
Is Claudio thine enemy?,Is Claudio your enemy?
"Is he not approved in the height a villain, that hath slandered, scorned, dishonored my kinswoman? Oh, that I were a man! What, bear her in hand until they come to take slander, unmitigated rancor—O God, that I were a man! I would eat his heart in the marketplace.","Hasn’t he proven himself to be a great villain—slandering, scorning, and dishonoring my cousin? Oh, I wish I were a man! He pretended that everything was fine until the moment they were exchanging vows, and then—with public accusation, blatant slander, pure hatred—Oh God, if only I were a man! I would rip his heart out in public and eat it."
"Hear me, Beatrice—","Listen to me, Beatrice—"
Talk with a man out at a window! A proper saying!,Talking with a man outside her bedroom window! A likely story!
"Nay, but Beatrice—","No, but Beatrice—"
"Sweet Hero, she is wronged, she is slandered, she is undone.","Sweet Hero, she’s been wronged, she’s been slandered, she’s been ruined."
Beat—,Beat—
"Princes and counties! Surely, a princely testimony, a goodly were a man for his sake! Or that I had any friend would be a man for my sake! But manhood is melted into curtsies, valor into compliment, and men are only turned into tongue, and trim ones too. He is now as valiant as Hercules wishing, therefore I will die a woman with grieving.","Princes and counts! Oh, of course, it was all so proper and ceremonious—they gave a truly princely testimony. He’s a proper count, that Count Sugarplum, a sweet gentleman, for sure! Oh, if only I were a man! Or had a friend who would be a man for me! But there are no real men left. Their manliness has melted into pretty curtsies and fancy manners, and their bravery is spent on making clever compliments. All this conversing has turned men into tongues—and fancy ones, at that. The man who tells a lie and swears by it is now considered as brave as Hercules. I can’t make myself a man by wishing I were, so as a woman I’ll die, from grieving."
"Tarry, good Beatrice. By this hand, I love thee.","Wait, good Beatrice. I swear by this hand that I love you."
Use it for my love some other way than swearing by it.,Don’t just swear by it; put your hand to some use that will prove you love me.
Think you in your soul the Count Claudio hath wronged,"Do you honestly think, in your soul, that Claudio has wrongly accused Hero? Hercules was a great hero in Greek and Roman mythology. Hero?"
"Yea, as sure as I have a thought or a soul.","Yes, as sure as I have a thought or a soul."
"Enough, I am engaged. I will challenge him. I will kiss your hand, and so I leave you. By this hand, Claudio shall render me a dear account. As you hear of me, so think of me. Go farewell.","That’s enough for me, then. I’ll challenge him. I’ll kiss your hand, and with that I leave you. I swear that Claudio will pay dearly for this. Keep me in your thoughts and go comfort your cousin. I’ll go tell them that she’s dead. Goodbye."
Is our whole dissembly appeared?,Is our whole dissembly “Dissembly” is a mistake for “assembly.” dissembly here?
"Oh, a stool and a cushion for the Sexton.","Oh, we need a stool and a cushion for the sexton."
Which be the malefactors?,Which ones are the malefactors?
"Marry, that am I and my partner.","Sir, that would be me and my partner."
"Nay, that’s certain; we have the exhibition to examine.","Yes, yes, we’ve been exhibitioned “Exhibitioned” is a mistake for “commissioned.” exhibitioned to examine this case."
But which are the offenders that are to be examined? Let them come before Master Constable.,"No, you’ve misunderstood me—where are the criminals whom I’m supposed to examine? Have them come in front of the master constable."
"Yea, marry, let them come before me. What is your name, friend?","Yes, indeed, bring them before me."
"What’s your name, friend?","What’s your name, friend?"
Borachio.,Borachio.
"Pray, write down, “Borachio.”—Yours, sirrah?","Please, write down “Borachio.”—And yours?"
"I am a gentleman, sir, and my name is Conrade.","I’m a gentleman, sir, and my name is Conrade."
"Write down “Master Gentleman Conrade.”—Masters, do","Write down “Master Gentleman Conrade.”—Gentlemen, are you good Christians, and do you serve God?"
"Yea, sir, we hope.","Yes, sir, we hope so."
"Write down that they hope they serve God; and write God first, for God defend but God should go before such villains!—Masters, it is proved already that you are little shortly. How answer you for yourselves?","Write down that they hope they serve God. Oh, and write “God” first—for God forbid we put these criminals before God!—Gentlemen, it’s already been proven that you aren’t much better than lying criminals, and soon we’ll know almost for certain. How do you both plead?"
"Marry, sir, we say we are none.","Honestly, sir, we say that we are not criminals."
"A marvelous witty fellow, I assure you, but I will go about with him.—Come you hither, sirrah, a word in your ear.","He’s a marvelously witty fellow, no doubt, but I’ll outmaneuver him.—Come over here; I’ll whisper a word in your ear. Sir, I tell you we believe you’re both lying criminals."
"Sir, I say to you we are none.","Sir, I tell you that we are not."
"Well, stand aside.—'Fore God, they are both in a ale. Have you writ down that they are none?","Well, okay.—I swear to God, both their stories match. Have you written that down, that they aren’t criminals?"
"Master Constable, you go not the way to examine. You","Master Constable, you’re going about this all wrong. First, you have to speak to the watchmen who accused them."
"Yea, marry, that’s the eftest way.—Let the watch come forth. Masters, I charge you in the Prince’s name, accuse these men.","Yes, good idea; that’s the eftest “Eftest” is a mistake for “aptest.” eftest way. Bring the watchmen forward. Gentlemen, I order you in the Prince’s name to accuse these men."
"This man said, sir, that Don John, the Prince’s brother, was","This man said, sir, that Don John, the Prince’s brother, was a villain."
"Write down Prince John a villain. Why, this is flat perjury, to call a prince’s brother villain.","Write down that Prince John is a villain. Why, that’s flat-out perjury Dogberry probably means “treachery on “slanden.” perjury —to call a prince’s brother a villain."
Master Constable—,Master Constable—
"Pray thee, fellow, peace. I do not like thy look, I promise","Be quiet, you. I swear, I don’t like the look of you."
(to Watch) What heard you him say else?,(to the watchmen) What else did you hear him say?
"Marry, that he had received a thousand ducats of Don John for accusing the Lady Hero wrongfully.",That Don John had given him a thousand pieces of gold for wrongfully accusing the Lady Hero.
Flat burglary as ever was committed.,"That’s burglary, that is."
"Yea, by Mass, that it is.","Yes, by God, that it is."
"What else, fellow?",What else did you hear?
"And that Count Claudio did mean upon his words to disgrace Hero before the whole assembly, and not marry her.",I heard that Count Claudio meant to disgrace Hero in front of the whole wedding party and refuse to marry her.
everlasting redemption for this.,"(to BORACHIO) Oh, you villain! You’ll be condemned to everlasting redemption “Redemption” is a mistake for “damnation.” redemption for this!"
What else?,What else?
This is all.,That’s all.
"And this is more, masters, than you can deny. Prince John manner accused, in this very manner refused, and upon the grief of this, suddenly died.—Master Constable, let these men be bound and brought to Leonato’s. I will go before and show him their examination.","(to CONRADE and BORACHIO) You can’t deny this, gentlemen. This morning, Prince John secretly snuck out of Messina. Hero was accused exactly as the watchman described, and died on the spot from the grief. Master Constable, tie up these men and bring them to Leonato’s. I’ll get there first and tell him what we found out."
"Come, let them be opinioned.","Come on, let’s get them opinioned By “opinioned,” he means “pinioned” (tied down by the arms). opinioned ."
Let them be in the hands—,Let them be in the hands—
"Off, coxcomb!","Get off me, you fool!"
"God’s my life, where’s the Sexton? Let him write down the Prince’s officer “coxcomb.” Come, bind them.—Thou","Honest to God, where’s the sexton? He should write down that the Prince’s officer was called a fool. Come on, tie them up. (to CONRADE) You’re a nasty little stinker!"
"Away! You are an ass, you are an ass!","Get away from me, you ass! You ass!"
"Dost thou not suspect my place? Dost thou not suspect my years? Oh, that he were here to write me down an ass! But masters, remember that I am an ass, though it be not villain, thou art full of piety, as shall be proved upon thee by good witness. I am a wise fellow and, which is more, an officer and, which is more, a householder and, which is more, as pretty a piece of flesh as any is in Messina, and one and a fellow that hath had losses, and one that hath two gowns and everything handsome about him.—Bring him away.—Oh, that I had been writ down an ass!","How can you call me that? Don’t you suspect my office? Don’t you suspect “Suspect” is a mistake for “respect.” suspect my age? Oh, if only the sexton were here to write down that I’m an ass! Gentlemen, remember that I am an ass; even though it’s not written down, don’t forget that I’m an ass. Oh, you’re a rotten bastard, you are. I’m a wise man and, what’s more, I’m an officer of the law and, what’s more, I’m a householder and, what’s more, I’m as handsome a hunk of meat as any in Messina. And I know the law, damn you, and I’m rich enough, damn you, and I used to have more, but I still have two robes and lots of lovely things.—Take him away!—Oh, if only the sexton had recorded that I’m an ass!"
"If you go on thus, you will kill yourself, And ’tis not wisdom thus to second grief Against yourself.","If you keep on the way you’ve been going, you’ll kill yourself. There’s no point in adding to your grief."
"I pray thee, cease thy counsel, Which falls into mine ears as profitless Nor let no comforter delight mine ear But such a one whose wrongs do suit with mine. Bring me a father that so loved his child, Whose joy of her is overwhelmed like mine, Measure his woe the length and breadth of mine, And let it answer every strain for strain, As thus for thus and such a grief for such, In every lineament, branch, shape, and form. Bid sorrow wag, cry “hem” when he should groan, Patch grief with proverbs, make misfortune drunk With candle-wasters, bring him yet to me And I of him will gather patience. Can counsel and speak comfort to that grief Which they themselves not feel, but, tasting it, Their counsel turns to passion which before Would give preceptial med'cine to rage, Charm ache with air, and agony with words.","Stop advising me; your words pass through my ears like water through a sieve. Don’t counsel me. Only someone who’s been wronged as I have can comfort me. Find a father who loved his child as overwhelmingly as I loved Hero and askhim to be patient. Compare the length and width of that man’s sadness against my own; match up all the complaints and strong emotions that run through our bodies. If a man who has suffered as I have gave me advice the way you do—smiling and stroking his beard, telling me to toss away my sorrow, giving speeches when he should be wailing with me, trying to heal my grief with little proverbs, spinning my head around with philosophy—then I would take his advice and be patient. But that man doesn’t exist. You can try to comfort a man who feels a pain that you have never felt, but once you feel it too, your sober advice will also turn into passion. You can’t treat madness with rules or bind up insanity with little silken threads or cure heartache with hot air or lighten agony with pat phrases."
"No, no, ’tis all men’s office to speak patience To those that wring under the load of sorrow, But no man’s virtue nor sufficiency The like himself. Therefore give me no counsel. My griefs cry louder than advertisement.",Every man thinks it’s his duty to advise those who are overwrought with sorrow to be patient. But no man is so moral or so strong that they can endure the same advice when they themselves are grieving. So don’t advise me. My sorrow is crying too loudly to hear what you have to say.
Therein do men from children nothing differ.,Well then you’re no better than a child.
"I pray thee, peace. I will be flesh and blood, That could endure the toothache patiently, However they have writ the style of gods And made a push at chance and sufferance.","Please, leave me alone. I intend to be flesh and blood, not airy philosophy, for there has never yet been a philosopher who could endure a toothache patiently, even though they all write as if they had risen above human suffering and misfortune."
Yet bend not all the harm upon yourself.,But don’t take all that pain on yourself. Make sure the ones who have wronged you suffer too.
"There thou speak’st reason. Nay, I will do so. My soul doth tell me Hero is belied, And that shall Claudio know; so shall the Prince And all of them that thus dishonor her.","Now you’re talking. I definitely will. In my soul, I believe Hero has been falsely accused. And I’ll make sure that Claudio, the Prince, and anyone else who helped dishonor her know about it."
Here comes the Prince and Claudio hastily.,The Prince and Claudio are hurrying this way.
"Good e'en, good e'en.","Good evening, good evening."
Good day to both of you.,Good day to both of you.
"Hear you, my lords—","Listen, my lords—"
"We have some haste, Leonato.","We’re in a bit of a hurry, Leonato."
"Some haste, my lord! Well, fare you well, my lord. Are you so hasty now? Well, all is one.","A bit of a hurry, my lord! Well then, good bye, my lord. You’re in a hurry, are you? Well then, don’t bother."
"Nay, do not quarrel with us, good old man.","Come on, don’t quarrel with us, good old man."
"If he could right himself with quarreling, Some of us would lie low.","If it’s fighting he is after, some of us here should run and hide."
Who wrongs him?,Who has wronged him?
"Marry, thou dost wrong me, thou dissembler, thou. Nay, never lay thy hand upon thy sword.","Indeed, you have wronged me, you liar. Don’t bother trying to intimidate me by putting your hand on your sword. I’m not scared of you."
"Marry, beshrew my hand If it should give your age such cause of fear. In faith, my hand meant nothing to my sword.","Curse my hand if it ever threatened an old man like you. Really, I had no intention of going for my sword."
"Tush, tush, man, never fleer and jest at me. I speak not like a dotard nor a fool, What I have done being young, or what would do Were I not old. Know, Claudio, to thy head, Thou hast so wronged mine innocent child and me That I am forced to lay my reverence by, Do challenge thee to trial of a man. I say thou hast belied mine innocent child. Thy slander hath gone through and through her heart, And she lies buried with her ancestors, Save this of hers, framed by thy villainy.","Damn you, don’t mock and sneer at me. I’m not a doddering old fool who brags about the things he did when he was young, and what he would do now if he weren’t so old. Claudio, I’m telling you right to your face that you have wronged me and my innocent child. I am forced to lay aside my old man’s respectability, and with my gray hairs and my aching body I challenge you to a duel. You have ruined my innocent child. Your slander has broken her heart, and now she lies buried with her ancestors in a tomb—ancestors who had never been tainted by scandal until you caused one with your wickedness."
My villainy?,My wickedness?
"Thine, Claudio, thine, I say.","Yours, Claudio, yours, I say."
"You say not right, old man.","You’ve got it wrong, old man."
"My lord, my lord, I’ll prove it on his body if he dare, His May of youth and bloom of lustihood.","My lord, if he dares to accept my challenge, I’ll beat him and prove he’s guilty. I’ll beat him despite his fancy fencing techniques and all the practicing he does, despite his youth and manliness."
Away! I will not have to do with you.,Not a chance! I’ll have nothing to do with you.
"Canst thou so daff me? Thou hast killed my child. If thou kill’st me, boy, thou shalt kill a man.","You think you can get rid of me that easily? You killed my child. Take on someone your own size: if you kill me, boy, you’ll have killed a man."
"But that’s no matter. Let him kill one first. Win me and wear me! Let him answer me.— Come, follow me, boy. Come, sir boy, come, follow me. Sir boy, I’ll whip you from your foining fence,","He’ll have to kill both of us, and indeed we’re both men. But let him start off easy by killing one of us. Come on—kill me and brag about it! Let me at him. Come on, come after me, little boy. Come on and get me. Little man, I’ll be right in your face with my sword. I will, as surely as I am a gentleman."
Brother—,Brother—
"Content yourself. God knows I loved my niece, And she is dead, slandered to death by villains That dare as well answer a man indeed Boys, apes, braggarts, jacks, milksops!","Quiet. God knows I loved my niece, and now she’s dead—slandered to death by cowards who would just as likely fight a real man as I would grab a poisonous snake by the tongue. Boys, fools, braggers, scoundrels, babies!"
Brother Anthony—,Brother Anthony—
"Hold you content. What, man! I know them, yea, And what they weigh, even to the utmost scruple— That lie and cog and flout, deprave and slander, Go anticly and show outward hideousness, And speak off half a dozen dang'rous words How they might hurt their enemies, if they durst,","Hold your peace. I know their kind, I know them exactly. They’re petulant, disrespectful, fashion-crazy boys who lie and cheat and mock, defame and slander. They walk around in outlandish outfits, pretending to be brave and wild and saying a few inflammatory things about how they’ll hurt their enemies—and that’s all they do."
But brother Anthony—,But brother Anthony—
"Come, ’tis no matter. Do not you meddle. Let me deal in this.","Don’t, it’s no big deal. Don’t bother with it. Let me deal with this."
"Gentlemen both, we will not wake your patience. My heart is sorry for your daughter’s death, But what was true and very full of proof.","Gentlemen, we won’t stay here and anger you further. I’m sorry about your daughter’s death, but I swear our accusations were true, and backed up with proof."
"My lord, my lord—","My lord, my lord—"
I will not hear you.,I don’t want to hear any more about it.
"No? Come, brother; away! I will be heard.","No? Come on, brother! I’m determined to be heard by someone."
"And shall, or some of us will smart for it.","And you will be, or some people here will suffer for it."
"See, see, here comes the man we went to seek.","Look, here comes just the man we were looking for."
"Now, Signior, what news?","What’s up, mister?"
"(to DON PEDRO) Good day, my lord.","(to DON PEDRO) Hello, my lord."
"Welcome, Signior. You are almost come to part almost a","Welcome, sir. You just missed a fight that was barely avoided."
We had like to have had our two noses snapped off with two old men without teeth.,We were about to have our noses snapped off by two old men with no teeth.
"Leonato and his brother. What think’st thou? Had we fought, I doubt we should have been too young for them.","Leonato and his brother. What do you think? I think if we had fought, we would have proven too young and strong for them after all."
both.,There’s no bravery in an unfair fight. I’ve been look- ing for you two.
"We have been up and down to seek thee, for we are high- proof melancholy and would fain have it beaten away. Wilt thou use thy wit?","We’ve been looking for you, too. We’re really depressed. Will you tell us some jokes to beat our sad- ness away?"
It is in my scabbard. Shall I draw it?,My wit’s in my scabbard A scabbard is a covering for a sword. scabbard . Should I unsheath it?
Dost thou wear thy wit by thy side?,You wear your wit next to you?
"Never any did so, though very many have been beside their wit. I will bid thee draw, as we do the minstrels: draw to pleasure us.","No one carries their wit next to them, though some people are beside their wit “beside their wit” = crazy beside their wit . Come on, draw your wit, just as musicians draw their bows across the instru- ments: draw for our pleasure."
angry?,"Look: Benedick is so pale—are you sick, or angry?"
"(to BENEDICK) What, courage, man! What though care killed a cat? Thou hast mettle enough in thee to kill care.","(to BENEDICK) Buck up, man! Care “Care” here means “seriousness.” Claudio puns on an old proverb. Care may have killed the cat, but you are strong enough to kill care. Lighten up."
"Sir, I shall meet your wit in the career, an you charge it","Sir, don’t even try to beat me in a battle of wits. I’ll meet all your attacks, even if you come charging at me with a lance at full gallop. Choose another tack."
"(to DON PEDRO) Nay, then, give him another staff. This last was broke 'cross.","(to DON PEDRO) That was poor, Benedick! Give him another lance—that last one got broken in half."
"By this light, he changes more and more. I think he be angry indeed.","Lord, he seems to be getting paler by the minute. I think he really is angry."
"If he be, he knows how to turn his girdle.","If he is, that’s his problem."
Shall I speak a word in your ear?,Can I have a word with you privately?
God bless me from a challenge!,God forbid he wants to challenge me!
"(aside to CLAUDIO) You are a villain. I jest not. I will make it good how you dare, with what you dare, and when you have killed a sweet lady, and her death shall fall heavy on you. Let me hear from you.","(speaking so that only CLAUDIOcan hear) You are a vil- lain. I’m not kidding. I challenge you however you like—with whatever weapons you choose, and whe- never you want. Meet this challenge, or I’ll say that you’re a coward. You’ve killed an innocent woman, and you’re going to pay dearly for her death. What do you say?"
"Well, I will meet you, so I may have good cheer.","I’ll be there, and I’ll enjoy myself."
"What, a feast, a feast?","What, are we having a feast?"
"capon, the which if I do not carve most curiously, say my knife’s naught. Shall I not find a woodcock too?","Yes, we are. He has invited me to have a calf’s head and a capon Calf’s heads, capons, and woodcocks are all dishes that symbolize stupidity. calf’s head and a capon . He says if I don’t carve them up and serve them elegantly, he’ll declare I have no skills with a knife. Should I go get us a woodcock, too?"
"Sir, your wit ambles well; it goes easily.","Sir, you have a very slow, rambling wit."
"I’ll tell thee how Beatrice praised thy wit he other day. I one.” “No,” said I, “a great wit.” “Right,” says she, “a great gross one.” “Nay,” said I, “a good wit.” “Just,” said she, “it hurts nobody.” “Nay,” said I, “the gentleman is wise.” “Certain,” said she, “a wise gentleman.” “Nay,” said I, “he a thing to me on Monday night, which he forswore on Tuesday morning; there’s a double tongue, there’s two tongues.” Thus did she an hour together transshape thy particular virtues. Yet at last she concluded with a sigh,","Benedick, Beatrice praised your wit the other day. I said you had a fine wit. “True,” she said, “a fine little one.” “No,” I said, “a huge wit.” “Right,” she said, “a hugely awful one.” “No,” I said, “he has a good wit.” “Exactly,” she said, “it’s good and mild; it doesn’t hurt anyone.” “No,” I said, “Benedick is wise.” “He is certainly,” she said, “a wise gentleman.” “A wise gentleman” was often used to describe an old, foolish man. “a wise gentleman.” “No,” I said, “he can speak many languages:” “I can believe that,” she said, “because he swore one thing to me on Monday night and took it back on Tuesday morning. He spoke two languages then.” She turned all your virtues into vices just about an hour ago. But in the end she sighed and admitted you were the handsomest man in Italy."
For the which she wept heartily and said she cared not.,"She cried a lot at that, and said she didn’t care."
"Yea, that she did. But yet for all that, an if she did not hate him deadly, she would love him dearly. The old man’s daughter told us all.","That she did. And yet for all that, if she didn’t hate him to death, she’d love him to death. Leonato’s daughter had told us everything."
the garden.,"Absolutely everything. And, moreover, God saw Benedick when he was hid in the garden."
But when shall we set the savage bull’s horns on the sensible Benedick’s head?,But when exactly will we see Benedick married?
"Yea, and text underneath: “Here dwells Benedick the","Yes, with the sign underneath him that says: “Here lives Benedick the married man”?"
"Fare you well, boy. You know my mind. I will leave you now to your gossip-like humor. You break jests as braggarts do their blades, which, God be thanked, hurt not.—My lord, for your many courtesies I thank you. I must discontinue","Goodbye, boy. You know what I intend. I’ll leave you now to chatter and gossip like an old woman. The wit you flaunt is like a blunt sword—it can’t hurt anyone, thank God.—My lord, I thank you for your many kindnesses. I’m leaving your court now."
"Your brother the Bastard is fled from Messina. You have among you killed a sweet and innocent lady. For my Lord Lackbeard there, he and I shall meet, and till then peace be with him.","Your brother Don John the Bastard has run away from Messina. The three of you have killed a sweet, innocent woman. Lord Babyface over there will meet me in a duel, and good luck to him then."
He is in earnest.,He’s serious.
"In most profound earnest, and, I’ll warrant you, for the love of Beatrice.","Very serious, and I’m sure it’s because of Beatrice."
And hath challenged thee?,And he challenged you to a duel?
Most sincerely.,"He did, very sincerely."
hose and leaves off his wit!,What a strange sight—a man who has put on all his fancy clothes but forgotten his brain at home!
He is then a giant to an ape; but then is an ape a doctor to such a man.,"A guy like that is bigger than an ape, but the ape could be his doctor, it’s so much smarter."
"But soft you, let me be. Pluck up, my heart, and be sad. Did",But wait a minute. Let me gather my wits and get serious here. Didn’t he say my brother has run away?
"Come you, sir. If justice cannot tame you, she shall ne'er weigh more reasons in her balance. Nay, an you be a cursing hypocrite once, you must be looked to.","Come on, you. If they let you off, then we’ll have to assume that Lady Justice has lost all her power. Since you are a lying hypocrite, we must look after you."
How now? Two of my brother’s men bound! Borachio one!,"What’s this? Two of my brother’s men, all tied up! And Borachio is one of them!"
"Hearken after their offense, my lord.",Find out what they’re being held for.
"Officers, what offense have these men done?","Officers, what crime have these men committed?"
"Marry, sir, they have committed false report; moreover, they have spoken untruths; secondarily, they are slanders; sixth and lastly, they have belied a lady; thirdly, they have knaves.","Well sir, they’ve lied; moreover, they have said things that were not true; secondarily, they are slanderers; sixth and lastly, they have falsely accused a lady; thirdly, they have confirmed things that did not in fact happen; and, in conclusion, they are lying scoundrels."
"First, I ask thee what they have done; thirdly, I ask thee what’s their offense; sixth and lastly, why they are committed; and, to conclude, what you lay to their charge.","First, I ask you what they’ve done; thirdly, I ask you what offense they’re charged with; sixth and lastly, I ask you why they’ve been committed here; and, in conclusion, I ask what they’re accused of."
"troth, there’s one meaning well suited.","Nicely done, and organized in just the way he’ll understand. My God, he manages to say the same thing six different ways."
"(to BORACHIO and CONRADE) Who have you offended, masters, that you are thus bound to your answer? This learned constable is too cunning to be understood. What’s","(to BORACHIO and CONRADE) What have you done, gentlemen? This educated constable is too brilliant for me to understand. What is your crime?"
"Sweet Prince, let me go no farther to mine answer. Do you hear me, and let this count kill me. I have deceived even your very eyes. What your wisdoms could not discover, these shallow fools have brought to light, who in the night brother incensed me to slander the Lady Hero, how you were brought into the orchard and saw me court Margaret in Hero’s garments, how you disgraced her when you should marry her. My villainy they have upon record, which I had lady is dead upon mine and my master’s false accusation. And, briefly, I desire nothing but the reward of a villain.","Prince, I won’t wait for my trial: listen to my story, and let the count kill me now. I tricked your own eyes. These stupid fools have uncovered what you in all your wisdom could not. They heard me confess to Conrade how Don John, your brother, prompted me to slander Hero—how you came to the orchard and saw me making sexual advances toward Margaret, who was disguised as Hero; how you disgraced Hero when you should have married her. They’ve recorded my crimes, and I would rather die than have to retell this shameful story. The lady has died because of the false accusations of me and my master. I desire nothing now but a criminal’s punishment."
(to CLAUDIO) Runs not this speech like iron through your blood?,(to CLAUDIO) Doesn’t this make your blood run cold?
I have drunk poison whiles he uttered it.,His words are like poison to me.
(to BORACHIO) But did my brother set thee on to this?,(to BORACHIO) But did my brother prompt you to do all this?
"Yea, and paid me richly for the practice of it.","Yes, and paid me well for doing it."
"He is composed and framed of treachery, And fled he is upon this villainy.","He is made of treachery, and has run away to avoid his crimes."
In the rare semblance that I loved it first.,"Sweet Hero; when I imagine you now, you seem as beautiful as you did when I first loved you."
"Come, bring away the plaintiffs. By this time our sexton hath reformed Signior Leonato of the matter. And, masters, do not forget to specify, when time and place shall","Come, take away the plaintiffs “Plaintiffs” is a mistake for “defendant”; “reformed” is a mistake for “informed.” plaintiffs . By now the sexton will have reformed Signior Leonato of the matter. (to CLAUDIO and DON PEDRO) And, gentlemen, please do not forget to specify, whenever it is convenient, that I am an ass."
"Here, here comes Master Signior Leonato, and the Sexton too.",Here comes Master Signior Leonato with the sexton.
"Which is the villain? Let me see his eyes, That, when I note another man like him,","Which one of them did it? Let me see what he looks like, so when I see another man who resembles him, I’ll know to avoid him. Which one is it?"
"If you would know your wronger, look on me.","If you want to see your deceiver, then look at me."
Art thou the slave that with thy breath hast killed Mine innocent child?,"Are you the slave who, with your slanderous words, killed my innocent child?"
"Yea, even I alone.","Yes, I am the one."
"No, not so, villain, thou beliest thyself. A third is fled—that had a hand in it.— I thank you, princes, for my daughter’s death. Record it with your high and worthy deeds. 'Twas bravely done, if you bethink you of it.","No, villain, but you didn’t work alone. (indicating CLAUDIO and DON PEDRO) For here are two noblemen —the third has run away—who helped you. (to CLAUDIO and DON PEDRO) Thank you, gentlemen, for my daughter’s death. Make a note of it on your long lists of righteous and worthy deeds. It was very brave of you."
Yet I must speak. Choose your revenge yourself. Impose me to what penance your invention Can lay upon my sin. Yet sinned I not But in mistaking.,"I don’t know how to ask you for forgiveness, but I have to say something. Choose your revenge. Punish me through any means you can devise, though I sinned by mistake."
"By my soul, nor I, I would bend under any heavy weight That he’ll enjoin me to.","Me too—but to satisfy this good old man, I too will bear any punishment he gives me."
"I cannot bid you bid my daughter live— That were impossible—but, I pray you both, How innocent she died. And if your love Can labor ought in sad invention, Hang her an epitaph upon her tomb And sing it to her bones. Sing it tonight. And since you could not be my son-in-law, Be yet my nephew. My brother hath a daughter, Almost the copy of my child that’s dead, And she alone is heir to both of us. And so dies my revenge.","I can’t ask you to make my daughter live—that’s impossible—but I beg you both to tell the people of Messina that she was innocent when she died. And if your love can produce something from its sadness, write a poem for her; hang it on her grave and sing it to her bones. Sing it tonight. Then come to my house tomorrow morning, and since you couldn’t be my son-in-law, be my nephew instead. My brother has a daughter who looks exactly like Hero; this girl is heir to both our estates. Marry her as you should have married her cousin, and I will let my revenge die."
O noble sir! Your overkindness doth wring tears from me. I do embrace your offer; and dispose For henceforth of poor Claudio.,"Oh, noble sir! Your overwhelming kindness makes me weep. I willingly accept your offer and put my future in your hands."
"Tonight I take my leave. This naughty man Shall face to face be brought to Margaret, Who I believe was packed in all this wrong, Hired to it by your brother.","I will see you tomorrow, then. Now I have to leave. This wicked man will be brought face to face with Margaret, who I believe was hired by Don John to take part in this plot."
"Nor knew not what she did when she spoke to me, But always hath been just and virtuous In any thing that I do know by her.","No, she wasn’t, and she didn’t know anything about it. She has always been honest and good."
"(to LEONATO) Moreover, sir, which indeed is not under ass. I beseech you, let it be remembered in his punishment. And also the watch heard them talk of one Deformed. They say he wears a key in his ear and a lock hanging by it and borrows money in God’s name, the which he hath used so will lend nothing for God’s sake. Pray you, examine him upon that point.","(to LEONATO) Also, sir, this hasn’t been put down in writing, but I should let you know that this plaintiff “Plaintiff” is a mistake for “defendant.” plaintiff here, the criminal, did in fact call me an ass. Please remember that when you’re punishing him. Plus, the watchmen heard the criminals talking about some man named Deformed Dogberry garbles the events of Act , scene . Deformed . They say that he has an earring made out of a key, with a lock hanging from it. Apparently, he borrows money from people in the name of God and then never pays it back, which angers everyone so much that they now refuse to fund anything in the name of God. Make sure you ask him about this."
I thank thee for thy care and honest pains.,Thank you for all your efforts.
Your worship speaks like a most thankful and reverent,"You speak like a very thankful and respectful boy, and may God bless you."
(giving him money) There’s for thy pains.,(giving DOGBERRY money) This is for your trouble.
God save the foundation!,God save the charitable organization!
"Go, I discharge thee of thy prisoner, and I thank thee.","Go, you’re relieved of your duty. Thank you."
"I leave an arrant knave with your Worship, which I beseech God keep your Worship! I wish your Worship well. God restore you to health! I humbly give you leave to depart, and if a merry meeting may be wished, God prohibit it!— Come, neighbor.","I leave a slimy bastard with you, your Worship, for you to punish and make an example of. God bless your Worship! I wish you well. I hope that God restores you to health. I will humbly let you go now, God prohibiting “Prohibiting” is a mistake for “permitting.” prohibiting we will meet again in the future.—Come on, man."
"Until tomorrow morning, lords, farewell.","I’ll see you tomorrow morning, gentlemen."
"Farewell, my lords. We look for you tomorrow.","Goodbye, gentlemen. We’ll see you tomorrow."
We will not fail.,We’ll be there.
Tonight I’ll mourn with Hero.,I will mourn Hero tonight.
(to the Watch) How her acquaintance grew with this lewd fellow.,"(to the watchmen) Bring these criminals with us. We’ll go talk to Margaret, to see how she got involved with this worthless man."
"Pray thee, sweet Mistress Margaret, deserve well at my hands by helping me to the speech of Beatrice.","Please Margaret, help me write this poem for Beatrice."
Will you then write me a sonnet in praise of my beauty?,"Afterward, will you write a sonnet for me, praising my beauty?"
"In so high a style, Margaret, that no man living shall come","I’ll write you such a glorious sonnet, Margaret, that no man will ever be able to come over it. You certainly deserve it. Benedick means that no man will ever improve on his sonnet;"
"To have no man come over me! Why, shall I always keep below stairs?",No man will come over me Margaret interprets “come over” in a sexual way over me ! What a life that would be!
Thy wit is as quick as the greyhound’s mouth; it catches.,Your wit is as quick as a greyhound’s jaws—it catches whatever it goes after.
"And yours as blunt as the fencer’s foils, which hit but hurt","And your wit is as blunt as a practice sword, with its dull tip; it hits people but doesn’t hurt them."
"A most manly wit, Margaret, it will not hurt a woman. And so, I pray thee, call Beatrice. I give thee the bucklers.","It’s just that my wit is very gentlemanly, Margaret, and refuses to hurt a woman. Now please, tell Beatrice to come out. I admit defeat; I give you the bucklers A “buckler” is a shield with a spike in the middle of it. bucklers ."
Give us the swords; we have bucklers of our own.,"No, you should give a woman your sword—we have our own bucklers Margaret interprets “buckler” as the vagina (and the sword as the penis). bucklers !"
"If you use them, Margaret, you must put in the pikes with","Watch out, though, Margaret—virgins shouldn’t be brandishing their bucklers around."
"Well, I will call Beatrice to you, who I think hath legs.","I’ll go get Beatrice for you, who can walk here by herself—she has legs."
And therefore will come.,So that means she’ll come.
"(sings) The god of love, That sits above, And knows me, and knows me, How pitiful I deserve— I mean in singing. But in loving, Leander the good swimmer, Troilus the first employer of panders, and a whole bookful of these quondam carpetmongers, whose names yet run smoothly in the even road of a blank verse, why, they were never so truly turned over and over as my poor self in love. Marry, I cannot show it in rhyme. I have tried. I can find out no rhyme to “lady” but “baby”—an innocent rhyme; for “scorn,” “horn”—a hard rhyme; for, “school,” “fool”—a babbling rhyme; very ominous endings. No, I was not born under a rhyming planet, nor I cannot woo in festival terms.","(singing) The god of love He sits in heaven above And he knows me, he knows me He knows how much pity I deserve— I’m really a pitiful singer. But as a lover, well, that’s another story. Take Leander, Troilus Leander and Troilus are figures from two separate love stories, both well-known to Shakespeare’s audience. Leander, Troilus , or an entire book’s worth of those legendary lover–boys, whose names sound so smooth and nice in a line of verse—not one of them has been driven as crazy by love as I have been. But I can’t prove it in a poem. I have tried. I can’t think of any rhyme for “lady” but “baby,” which is a childish rhyme. The only rhyme for “scorn” I can come up with is “horn” In Shakespeare’s time, “horns” were associated with adultery. “horn” —a bit off for a love poem. Nothing rhymes with “school” but “fool,” and that’s a ridiculous jingle. These are all very unpromising line endings. No, I wasn’t destined to be a poet, and I can’t woo a lady with pretty words."
"Sweet Beatrice, wouldst thou come when I called thee?","Beatrice, have you come because I called for you?"
"Yea, Signior, and depart when you bid me.","Yes, sir, and I’ll leave when you ask me to."
"Oh , stay but till then!","Oh, well, stay till then!"
"“Then” is spoken. Fare you well now. And yet, ere I go, let me go with that I came, which is, with knowing what hath","There—you said “then.” So I’ll leave now. But before I go, let me get what I came for. What happened between you and Claudio?"
"Only foul words, and thereupon I will kiss thee.","I spoke angry, foul words to him, and with that I will kiss you."
"Foul words is but foul wind, and foul wind is but foul breath, and foul breath is noisome. Therefore I will depart unkissed.","If you had foul words in your mouth, then your breath must be foul, and foul breath is nauseating. Thus, I’ll leave without being kissed."
"forcible is thy wit. But I must tell thee plainly, Claudio undergoes my challenge, and either I must shortly hear from him, or I will subscribe him a coward. And I pray thee now tell me, for which of my bad parts didst thou first fall","Your wit is so forceful, it frightens the very meaning out of your words. But I will tell you this very plainly: I have challenged Claudio, and either he’ll accept the challenge or admit he’s a coward. Now, tell me—which of my bad qualities did you fall in love with first?"
"For them all together, which maintained so politic a state of evil that they will not admit any good part to intermingle with them. But for which of my good parts did you first suffer love for me?",With all of them at once: they work together to create such an entirely evil person that no good ever manages to enter the mix. But tell me—which of my good qualities first made you suffer love for me?
love thee against my will.,"Suffer love! That’s a good way of putting it. I do suffer love, because I love you against my will."
"In spite of your heart, I think. Alas, poor heart, if you spite it for my sake, I will spite it for yours, for I will never love that which my riend hates.","You love me in spite of your heart, I think. If you spite your heart for my sake, then I will spite it for yours. I will never love the thing my friend hates."
Thou and I are too wise to woo peaceably.,You and I are too wise to woo each other peacefully.
It appears not in this confession. There’s not one wise man among twenty that will praise himself.,"It’s said that no truly wise man will praise himself. If you say that you are wise, it’s likely you’re not."
"An old, an old instance, Beatrice, that lived in the lime of good neighbors. If a man do not erect in this age his own the bell rings and the widow weeps.","That’s an old proverb, Beatrice, from the time when neighbors praised each other. In this day and age, if a man doesn’t erect his own monument before he dies, he won’t be remembered past the funeral bell’s ringing and his widow’s crying."
"And how long is that, think you?","Exactly how long is that, do you think?"
"Question: why, an hour in clamor and a quarter in rheum. Therefore is it most expedient for the wise, if Don Worm, the trumpet of his own virtues, as I am to myself. So much for praising myself, who, I myself will bear witness, is praiseworthy. An now tell me, how doth your cousin?","About an hour for the ringing and fifteen minutes for the crying. That’s why it’s better for wise men to trumpet their own virtues, like I do. That’s why I praise myself, who—if I do say so myself—is quite praiseworthy. But tell me, how is your cousin?"
Very ill.,She’s very sick.
And how do you?,And how are you?
"Very ill, too.","I’m very sick, too."
"Serve God, love me, and mend. There will I leave you too, for here comes one in haste.","Have faith, love me, and you will get better. And that’s where I’ll end, because someone is hurrying this way."
"Madam, you must come to your uncle. Yonder’s old coil at accused, the Prince and Claudio mightily abused, and Don John is the author of all, who is fled and gone. Will you come presently?","Madam, you have to go to your uncle’s. There’s a huge racket going on there. It’s been proven that Lady Hero is innocent, that the Prince and Claudio have been utterly deceived, and that Don John—who has run away—is the source of all the trouble. Will you come immediately?"
"Will you go hear this news, Signior?","Will you come with me to hear this news, sir?"
"eyes—and moreover, I will go with thee to thy uncle’s.","I will live in your heart, die in your lap, and be buried in your eyes—and, what’s more, I will go with you to your uncle’s."
Is this the monument of Leonato?,Is this the family tomb of Leonato?
"It is, my lord.","It is, my lord."
"(reading an epitaph) Done to death by slanderous tongues Death, in guerdon of her wrongs, Gives her fame which never dies. So the life that died with shame Lives in death with glorious fame.","(reading an epitaph) Here lies Hero, The heroic maiden killed by slanderous words. To repay her for her troubles, Death Gives her undying fame. So the life that died with shame Lives on with fame."
"Praising her when I am dumb. Now, music, sound, and sing your solemn hymn. (Song) Pardon, goddess of the night, Those that slew thy virgin knight, For the which with songs of woe Round about her tomb they go. Midnight, assist our moan. Help us to sigh and groan Heavily, heavily. Graves, yawn and yield your dead, Till death be utterèd, Heavily, heavily.","This epitaph will hang here forever, Continuing to praise Hero after I die. Now start the music, and sing the solemn hymn. (singing) Please pardon, goddess of the night, The men who killed your virgin knight Diana was the Roman goddess associated with the moon, and her “knights” were virgin women. virgin knight . These men now walk around her tomb, Singing songs of woe. Oh, midnight, join our moaning Help us with our sighs and groaning Heavily, heavily. Graves, open up and release your corpses Until Hero’s death is fully mourned The meaning of this final line is unclear; it may also be interpreted as, “until death itself is beaten,” or “until we have fully realized what his death means.” Heavily, heavily."
"Now, unto thy bones good night!","Now I say good night to your bones, Hero. I will perform this ceremony every year."
"Good morrow, masters. Put your torches out. The wolves have preyed, and look, the gentle day, Before the wheels of Phoebus, round about Dapples the drowsy east with spots of grey.","Good morning, gentlemen. Put out your torches. The wolves have finished preying for the night, and look—the gentle dawn is rising, dappling the sleepy eastern sky with spots of light."
"Good morrow, masters. Each his several way.","Good morning, gentlemen. We go our separate ways."
"Come, let us hence, and put on other weeds, And then to Leonato’s we will go.","Come, let’s go and change our clothes. Then we’ll visit Leonato’s."
And Hymen now with luckier issue speed ’s,And I hope Hymen Hymen was the god of marriage. Hymen will give us better luck than Hero got.
Did I not tell you she was innocent?,Didn’t I tell you she was innocent?
"So are the Prince and Claudio, who accused her Upon the error that you heard debated. But Margaret was in some fault for this, In the true course of all the question.","And the Prince and Claudio, who accused her, are innocent as well, because they were deceived by Don John. Margaret is partially guilty, although our investigation shows that she acted unintentionally."
"Well, I am glad that all things sort so well.","Well, I’m glad that everything has been sorted out."
"And so am I, being else by faith enforced To call young Claudio to a reckoning for it.",Me too—otherwise I would have had to duel with Claudio.
"Withdraw into a chamber by yourselves, And when I send for you, come hither masked. The Prince and Claudio promised by this hour To visit me.—You know your office, brother. And give her to young Claudio.","Hero, you and the other women should all retreat to a room. When I send for you, come out wearing masks. The Prince and Claudio are supposed to be here by now.—You know your job, brother. You have to pretend to be your niece’s father, and give her away to Claudio."
Which I will do with confirmed countenance.,"I’ll do that, without giving away our secret."
"Friar, I must entreat your pains, I think.","Friar, I think I need a favor from you."
"To do what, Signior?",What do you need me to do?
"Signior Leonato, truth it is, good Signior, Your niece regards me with an eye of favor.","To tie me up, or to undo me: one or the other. Signior Leonato, the truth is, your niece likes me."
That eye my daughter lent her; ’tis most true.,"She sees you with the eyes my daughter lent her, it’s true."
And I do with an eye of love requite her.,And I see her also through the eyes of love.
From Claudio and the Prince. But what’s your will?,"And those eyes were endowed with sight by Claudio, the Prince, and me. But what did you want?"
"Your answer, sir, is enigmatical. But for my will, my will is your goodwill May stand with ours, this day to be conjoined In which, good Friar, I shall desire your help.","Sir, I’m puzzled by what you just said. But as far as what I want—I want you to give Beatrice and me your blessing to be married. That, good Friar, is where you come in."
My heart is with your liking.,"Our wishes are aligned, then: I give you my blessing."
And my help. Here comes the Prince and Claudio.,And I’ll help you. Here comes the Prince and Claudio.
Good morrow to this fair assembly.,Good morning to all these lovely people.
We here attend you. Are you yet determined Today to marry with my brother’s daughter?,"Good morning, Prince; good morning, Claudio. We’re waiting here for you. Are you still set on marrying my brother’s daughter?"
I’ll hold my mind were she an Ethiope.,"I wouldn’t change my mind even if she were black-skinned Maidens in Shakespeare’s time were valued for fair skin. (“Ethiopian” referred to black Africans generally, not to a specific country.) black-skinned ."
"Call her forth, brother. Here’s the friar ready.","Bring her out, brother. The friar’s ready."
"That you have such a February face, So full of frost, of storm and cloudiness?","Good morning, Benedick. What’s the matter? Your face looks like the month of February—full of frost, storms, and cloudiness."
"I think he thinks upon the savage bull. Tush, fear not, man. We’ll tip thy horns with gold, As once Europa did at lusty Jove When he would play the noble beast in love.","I think he’s nervous—he’s about to become the savage bull who got domesticated. Oh, don’t worry about it—we’ll dip your horns Claudio continues the jokes of Act , scene , about husbands and cuckolds’ horns. horns in gold and make you pretty, and you’ll delight all of Europe, just like Jove delighted Europa when he was a bull."
"Bull Jove, sir, had an amiable low, And some such strange bull leapt your father’s cow Much like to you, for you have just his bleat.","Jove The god Jove came to earth in the shape of a bull and carried off the woman Europa. Jove came to earth lowing for love. A strange bull just like him mated with one of your father’s cows and, voilà, gave birth to a calf like you—you bleat the same as him."
For this I owe you. Here comes other reck'nings.,I’ll get you for that one. But here are other matters to be dealt with.
Which is the lady I must seize upon?,Which is the lady I’m supposed to marry?
"This same is she, and I do give you her.","This one, and I will give her to you."
"Why, then she’s mine.—Sweet, let me see your face.","Well, then she’s the one for me. Sweetheart, let me see your face."
"No, that you shall not till you take her hand Before this friar and swear to marry her.","No, you can’t do that until you take her hand and, in front of this friar, swear to marry her."
"(to HERO) Give me your hand before this holy friar. I am your husband, if you like of me.","(to HERO) Give me your hand. With the friar as my witness, I am your husband, if you want me."
"And when you loved, you were my other husband. (She unmasks)","And when I lived, I was your other wife. And when you loved me, you were my other husband.(she removes her mask)"
Another Hero!,It’s another Hero!
"Nothing certainer. One Hero died defiled, but I do live,","Exactly right. One Hero died when she was slandered, but I am alive. And as surely as I am alive, I am a virgin."
The former Hero! Hero that is dead!,It’s the former Hero! The Hero that died!
"She died, my lord, but whiles her slander lived.","She was only dead, my lord, as long as her slander lived."
"All this amazement can I qualify When after that the holy rites are ended Meantime let wonder seem familiar, And to the chapel let us presently.","I can confirm that all these shocking things are true. After the wedding ceremony, I’ll tell you all about beautiful Hero’s “death.” In the meantime, just accept all these wonderful things, and let’s head to the chapel."
"Soft and fair, Friar.—Which is Beatrice?","Wait a moment, Friar. Which one of you is Beatrice?"
(unmasking) I answer to that name. What is your will?,(taking off her mask) That’s my name. What do you want?
Do not you love me?,Do you love me?
"Why no, no more than reason.","No, no more than is reasonable."
"Why then, your uncle and the Prince and Claudio Have been deceived. They swore you did.","Well then, your uncle and the Prince and Claudio have been deceived. They swore you did."
Do not you love me?,Do you love me?
"Troth, no, no more than reason.","Truly, no—no more than is reasonable."
"Are much deceived, for they did swear you did.","Well then, Margaret, Ursula, and my cousin have been very much deceived, for they swore you did."
They swore that you were almost sick for me.,They swore that you were sick with love for me.
They swore that you were well-nigh dead for me.,They swore that you were nearly dead with love for me.
'Tis no such matter. Then you do not love me?,"Oh, well. So you don’t love me?"
"No, truly, but in friendly recompense.","No, I don’t—except as a friend."
"Come, cousin, I am sure you love the gentleman.","Come on, niece, I’m sure you love him."
"And I’ll be sworn upon ’t that he loves her, For here’s a paper written in his hand, A halting sonnet of his own pure brain, (Shows a paper)","And I’ll swear that he loves her. Here’s a clumsy sonnet, in Benedick’s handwriting, dedicated to Beatrice. (holding up a piece of paper)"
"And here’s another, Writ in my cousin’s hand, stol'n from her pocket, Containing her affection unto Benedick. (Shows a paper)","And here’s another poem, which I stole from my cousin’s pocket—in her handwriting and all about her adoration for Benedick. (holding up a piece of paper)"
"I will have thee, but, by this light, I take thee for pity.","What a miracle! Our handwriting gives away our hearts. Come on, I’ll take you, but honestly I’m only doing it out of pity."
"I would not deny you, but, by this good day, I yield upon great persuasion, and partly to save your life, for I was told you were in a consumption.","I won’t say no to you, but let it be known that I’m only doing this after a lot of persuasion and to save your life —I hear you were quickly wasting away without me."
Peace! I will stop your mouth.,"Oh, shut up! I’ll stop your mouth with a kiss."
"How dost thou, Benedick, the married man?",How does it feel to be Benedick the Married Man?
"I’ll tell thee what, Prince: a college of wit-crackers cannot flout me out of my humor. Dost thou think I care for a satire or an epigram? No. If a man will be beaten with brains, he purpose to marry, I will think nothing to any purpose that the world can say against it, and therefore never flout at me for what I have said against it. For man is a giddy thing, and this is my conclusion.—For thy part, Claudio, I did think to live unbruised, and love my cousin.","I’ll tell you what, Prince: a whole university full of wisecrackers couldn’t change my mood today. You think I care what I’m called? Well, I don’t. If a man is always afraid of what others think, he won’t even dare to dress nicely, because he’ll be afraid people will talk about him. In short, since I intend to get married, I won’t hear anyone say a bad thing about it. So don’t go making fun of me for what I said before. Man is a giddy, flighty thing: that’s my conclusion. And Claudio—though I’m sure I would have beaten you in our duel—since you’re likely to become my relative, I’ll let you go, unbruised, and love my cousin Hero."
"I had well hoped thou wouldst have denied Beatrice, that I might have cudgeled thee out of thy single life, to make thee a double-dealer, which out of question, thou wilt be, if my","I was sort of hoping you would say no to Beatrice, so that I could have smacked you out of your single life and made you a double dealer Here, “double-dealer” means both married man and adulterer. double dealer . Which you’ll probably turn into anyway, if my cousin Beatrice doesn’t keep you on a short leash."
"Come, come, we are friends. Let’s have a dance ere we are married, that we may lighten our own hearts and our wives' heels.","Come on, we’re all friends. Let’s do a dance, and have some fun, before we’re wed."
We’ll have dancing afterward.,We’ll dance after the wedding.
"sad. Get thee a wife, get thee a wife. There is no staff more reverend than one tipped with horn.","No, before! Musicians, play us a song.—Prince, you look sad. You should get a wife! Your royal staff would be so much more impressive if it were topped off by a horn Again, Benedick plays with the idea of the married man as a “horned” cuckold. horn ."
"(to DON PEDRO) My lord, your brother John is ta'en in flight And brought with armed men back to Messina.","(to DON PEDRO) My lord, your brother John was caught by armed soldiers as he fled. He’s been brought back to Messina."
"thee brave punishments for him.—Strike up, pipers.","(to DON PEDRO) Leave him till tomorrow. I’ll think of some awful punishment for him. Play on, musicians!"
