"Tush! Never tell me. I take it much unkindly That thou, Iago, who hast had my purse As if the strings were thine, shouldst know of this.","Come on, don’t tell me that. I don’t like it 			that you knew about this, Iago. All this time I’ve 			thought you were such a good friend that I’ve let you 			spend my money as if it was yours."
"'Sblood, but you’ll not hear me! If ever I 			did dream of such a matter, abhor me.","Damn it, you’re not listening to me! I never dreamed 			this was happening—if you find out I did, you can go 			ahead and hate me."
Thou told’st me Thou didst hold him in thy hate.,You told me you hated him.
"Despise me If I do not. Three great ones of the city Off-capped to him, and by the faith of man I know my price, I am worth no worse a place. But he (as loving his own pride and purposes) Evades them with a bombast circumstance And in conclusion Nonsuits my mediators. For “Certes,” says 			he, “I have already chose my officer.” And what was he? One Michael Cassio, a Florentine (A fellow almost damned in a fair wife) That never set a squadron in the field, Nor the division of a battle knows","I do hate him They\’re talking about Othello, though they never mention his name. him , I swear. Three of Venice’s most 			important noblemen took their hats off to him and asked him humbly 			to make me his lieutenant, the second in command. And I know my own 			worth well enough to know I deserve that position. But he wants to 			have things his own way, so he sidesteps the issue with a lot of 			military talk and refuses their request. “I’ve 			already chosen my lieutenant,” he says. And who does he 			choose? A guy who knows more about numbers than fighting! This guy 			from Florence named Michael Cassio. He has a pretty wife but he 			can’t even control her. And he’s definitely 			never commanded men in battle. He’s got no more hands-on 			knowledge of warfare than an old woman—unless you count 			what he’s read in books,"
"Wherein the toged consuls can propose As masterly as he. Mere prattle without practice Is all his soldiership. But he, sir, had th' election And I, of whom his eyes had seen the proof Christian and heathen, must be belee’d and calmed By debitor and creditor. This counter-caster He (in good time) must his lieutenant be And I, bless the mark, his Moorship’s ancient.","which any peace-lover can do. His military understanding is all 			theory, no practice. But Cassio’s been chosen over me. My 			career is cut short by some bookkeeper, even though the general saw 			my fighting skills first-hand in Rhodes and Cyprus. This accountant 			is now lieutenant, while I end up as the Moor’s Moor = North African Moor’s flag-bearer."
"By heaven, I rather would have been his hangman.","By God, I’d rather be his executioner."
"Why, there’s no remedy. 'Tis the curse of 			service. Preferment goes by letter and affection, And not by old gradation, where each second Stood heir to th' first. Now sir, be judge yourself, To love the Moor.","And there’s nothing I can do about it. 			That’s the curse of military service. You get promoted 			when someone likes you, not because you’re next in line. 			Now, you tell me: should I feel loyal to the Moor?"
I would not follow him then.,If you don’t like him you should quit.
"O sir, content you. I follow him to serve my turn upon him. Cannot be truly followed. You shall mark Many a duteous and knee-crooking knave That (doting on his own obsequious bondage) Wears out his time much like his master’s ass Whip me such honest knaves. Others there are Who, trimmed in forms and visages of duty, Keep yet their hearts attending on themselves And, throwing but shows of service on their lords, Do themselves homage. These fellows have some soul,","No, calm down. I’m serving under him to take advantage 			of him. We can’t all be masters, and not all masters 			should be followed. Look at all the devoted servants who work for 			their masters their whole lives for nothing but their food, and then 			when they get old they’re terminated. They ought to be 			whipped for being so stupid. But then there’s another 			kind of servant who looks dutiful and devoted, but who’s 			really looking out for himself. By pretending to serve their lords, 			these men get rich, and when they’ve saved up enough they 			can be their own masters. Guys like that have soul, and 			that’s the kind of guy I am. Let me tell"
"And such a one do I profess myself. For, sir, It is as sure as you are Roderigo, Were I the Moor, I would not be Iago. Heaven is my judge, not I for love and duty, But seeming so, for my peculiar end. For when my outward action doth demonstrate The native act and figure of my heart But I will wear my heart upon my sleeve For daws to peck at. I am not what I am.","you, as sure as your name’s Roderigo, if I were the 			Moor I wouldn’t want to be Iago. I may seem to love and 			obey him, but in fact, I’m just serving him to get what I 			want. If my outward appearance started reflecting what I really 			felt, soon enough I’d be wearing my heart on my sleeve 			for birds to peck at. No, it’s better to hide it. 			I’m not who I appear to be."
What a full fortune does the Thick-lips owe If he can carry’t thus!,"Thick-lips “Thick-lips” is a racial slur toward the Moor, Othello. Thick-lips sure is lucky if he can pull this off!"
"Call up her 			father. Proclaim him in the streets. Incense her kinsmen, And, though he in a fertile climate dwell, Plague him with flies. Though that his joy be joy Yet throw such changes of vexation on’t,","Let’s shout up to Desdemona’s father, wake 			him, pester him, spoil his happiness, spread rumors about him in the 			streets, enrage his relatives, and irritate him endlessly. However 			real his happiness is, it will vanish in light of this."
"Here is her father’s house, I’ll call 		 aloud.",Here’s her father’s house. I’ll 			call out.
"Do, with like timorous accent and dire yell As when, by night and negligence, the fire Is spied in populous cities.","Do it, and shout like the city’s on fire."
"What, ho, Brabantio! Signior Brabantio, ho!","Hey, Brabantio! Signor Brabantio, hey!"
"Awake! What, ho, Brabantio! Thieves! Thieves! Look to your house, your daughter, and your bags! Thieves! thieves!","Wake up, Brabantio! Wake up! Thieves! Thieves! Check on your 			daughter, your house, your money! Thieves! Thieves!"
What is the reason of this terrible summons?,What’s the reason for this horrible shouting? 			What’s the matter?
"Signior, is all your family within?","Sir, is everyone in your family at home?"
Are your doors locked?,Are your doors locked?
"Why, wherefore ask 			you this?",Why are you asking me that?
"Zounds, sir, you’re robbed! For shame, put on your 			gown. Your heart is burst, you have lost half your soul. Is tupping your white ewe. Arise, arise, Awake the snorting citizens with the bell Or else the devil will make a grandsire of you. Arise, I say!","For God’s sake, sir, you’ve been robbed. Get 			dressed. Your heart’s going to break. It’s 			like half your soul’s been ripped out. At this very 			minute an old black ram is having sex with your little white lamb. 			Wake up, wake up, ring a bell and wake up all the snoring citizens. 			If you wait too long you’ll have black grandchildren. Get 			up, I tell you!"
"What, have you 			lost your wits?",Are you crazy?
"Most reverend signior, do you know my voice?","Do you recognize my voice, noble lord?"
Not I. What are you?,Not me. Who are you?
My name is Roderigo.,My name’s Roderigo.
"The worser welcome. I have charged thee not to haunt about my doors. My daughter is not for thee. And now in madness, Being full of supper and distempering drafts, Upon malicious knavery dost thou come To start my quiet?",I told you not to hang around my house. I’ve already 			told you quite plainly that my daughter will never marry you. Now 			you come here drunk to make trouble and startle me out of a sound 			sleep?
"Sir, sir, sir—","Sir, sir, sir—"
But thou must needs be sure My spirits and my place have in their power To make this bitter to thee.,You know I’m powerful enough to make you pay for 		 this.
"Patience, good 			sir.","Please wait, sir."
"What tell’st thou me of robbing? This is Venice,",Why are you talking about robbery? This is Venice. My house 			isn’t in some remote countryside.
"Most grave 			Brabantio, In simple and pure soul I come to you—","Brabantio, with all due respect, I’m here out of 			courtesy and good will. I’ve come to tell 		 you—"
"Zounds, sir, you are one of those that will not serve God, if the 			devil bid you. Because we come to do you service and you think we 			are ruffians, you’ll have your daughter covered with a 			Barbary horse. You’ll have your nephews neigh to you. 			You’ll have coursers for cousins and gennets for 		 germans.","My God, sir, you’re stubborn and suspicious. We come 			here to help you and you treat us like thugs, but you let an African 			horse climb all over your daughter. Your grandsons will neigh to you 			like horses. Your whole family will be ruined."
What profane wretch art thou?,What kind of crude jerk are you?
"I am one, sir, that comes to tell you your daughter 		 and the Moor are now making the beast with two backs.",The kind that tells you that the Moor is having sex with your 			daughter right now.
Thou art a villain!,You’re a villain!
You are a 		 senator!,You’re a senator!
"This thou shalt answer. I know thee, Roderigo.","You’re going to pay for this, Roderigo. I know who you 			are."
"Sir, I will answer any thing. But, I beseech you, If’t be your pleasure and most wise consent At this odd-even and dull watch o' th' 		 night","I’ll answer for everything. I don’t know if 			you know or approve of this, but in the wee hours of the morning 			your daughter left your house, with no better escort than a hired 			gondolier, to go into the rough embrace of a lustful Moor. If all of 			this happened with your"
"Transported with no worse nor better guard But with a knave of common hire, a gondolier, To the gross clasps of a lascivious Moor, We then have done you bold and saucy wrongs. But if you know not this my manners tell me We have your wrong rebuke. Do not believe That, from the sense of all civility, Your daughter (if you have not given her leave) I say again, hath made a gross revolt, Tying her duty, beauty, wit, and fortunes In an extravagant and wheeling stranger If she be in her chamber or your house, Let loose on me the justice of the state For thus deluding you.","approval, then we’ve been very rude to bother you like 			this. But if you didn’t know about it, then you were 			wrong to get mad at us. I’d never play pranks on you. If 			you didn’t allow your daughter to do what 			she’s doing, then she’s rebelling against you. 			She’s throwing her life away on some stranger. Go ahead, 			see for yourself if she’s in her bedroom. If she is, you 			can sue me for lying to you."
"Strike on the 			tinder, ho! Give me a taper, call up all my people! Belief of it oppresses me already. Light, I say, light!",Light the candles! Wake up my whole household! I dreamt about 			this. I’m starting to worry it’s true. Give me 			some light!
"(to RODERIGO) Farewell, for I 			must leave you. It seems not meet, nor wholesome to my place, Against the Moor. For I do know the state (However this may gall him with some check) Cannot with safety cast him, for he’s embarked With such loud reason to the Cyprus wars Another of his fathom they have none To lead their business. In which regard,","(to RODERIGO) It’s time for me to say goodbye to you. It would be 			inappropriate—dangerous, even—for me to be 			seen working against the Moor, as I would if I stayed. The Venetian 			government might reprimand him for this, but it can’t 			safely get rid of him, since it needs him urgently for the imminent 			Cyprus wars. They couldn’t find another man with his 			abilities to lead their armed forces—not if their souls 			depended on it. I hate him, but I’ve got to show him 			signs of loyalty"
"Though I do hate him as I do hell pains, Yet for necessity of present life (Which is indeed but sign). That you shall surely find him, Lead to the Sagittary the raisèd search, And there will I be with him. So farewell.","and affection, even if it’s just an act. If you want to 			find him, send the search party to the Sagittarius Inn. He and I 			will be there."
"It is too true an evil. Gone she is. Is naught but bitterness. Now, Roderigo, Where didst thou see her?—Oh, unhappy girl!— With the Moor, say’st thou?—Who would be a 			father?— How didst thou know ’twas she?—Oh, she 			deceives me Raise all my kindred. Are they married, think you?","It’s true. She’s gone. The rest of my life 			will be nothing but bitterness. Now, Roderigo, where did you see 			her?—Oh, that miserable wretch!—You say you 			saw her with the Moor?—Oh, who would want to be a 			father?—How did you know it was her?—To think 			she tricked me so easily!—What did she say to 			you?—Get me more candles, and wake up all my relatives. 			Do you think they’re married?"
"Truly, I think they are.","Yes, I really think so."
"Oh, heaven, how got she out? Oh, treason of the blood! Fathers, from hence trust not your daughters' minds By which the property of youth and maidhood May be abused? Have you not read, Roderigo, Of some such thing?","Oh, heaven, how did she get out? My own flesh and blood rebels 			against me! Fathers, never trust your daughters just because they 			act obedient and innocent. Are there magic spells that can lead 			young virgins astray? Have you ever heard of anything like that, 			Roderigo?"
"Yes, sir, I have 			indeed.","Yes, sir, I have."
"Call up my brother—Oh, would you had had her! Where we may apprehend her and the Moor?","Call my brother.—Now I wish you’d married 			her!—Some of you go one way, some the other 			way.—Do you know where we can find her and the 		 Moor?"
"I think I can discover him, if you please To get good guard and go along with me.",I think I can find him. Get together a group of armed men and 			follow me.
"Pray you lead on. At every house I’ll call. And raise some special officers of might.— On, good Roderigo. I will deserve your pains.","Lead the way. I’ll stop at every house. I’m 			respected enough that most of them will do what I 			say.—Get your weapons! And get the officers who guard the 			city at night.—Let’s go, Roderigo. 			I’ll reward you for your troubles."
"Though in the trade of war I have slain men, Yet do I hold it very stuff o' th' 			conscience To do no contrived murder. I lack iniquity Sometimes to do me service. Nine or ten times","I’ve killed many men in battle, but I still believe 			it’s deeply wrong to murder someone. Sometimes I worry 			I’m not cruel enough for this job. Nine or ten times I 			wanted to stab him under the ribs."
'Tis better as it is.,It’s better that you didn’t kill him.
"Nay, but he prated And spoke such scurvy and provoking terms Against your honor That, with the little godliness I have, Are you fast married? Be assured of this: That the Magnifico is much beloved And hath in his effect a voice potential As double as the Duke’s. He will divorce you, The law (with all his might to enforce it on) Will give him cable.","But he kept chattering so foolishly, talking about you in such 			insulting and despicable terms, that it was hard for me to restrain 			myself. But please tell me, sir, is your marriage secure Iago may be asking whether Othello has consummated his marriage by sleeping with Desdemona yet. A marriage could be annulled if it had never been consummated. secure ? Brabantio 			is an important man in this city, almost as powerful as the duke 			himself. He’ll try to annul your marriage, or else 			inflict whatever punishment the law and his power will allow him to."
"Let him do his 			spite. My services which I have done the signiory Shall out-tongue his complaints. 'Tis yet to 			know— I shall promulgate. I fetch my life and being From men of royal siege, and my demerits May speak unbonneted to as proud a fortune As this that I have reached. For know, Iago, I would not my unhousèd free condition Put into circumscription and confine For the sea’s worth. But look, what lights come 		 yond?","Let him do his worst. The services I have done for the Venetian 			government will count for more than his complaints will. No one 			knows this yet—and I don’t like to brag, but I 			come from a royal family, and I’m as noble as the woman 			I’ve married. And let me tell you, Iago, if I 			didn’t love Desdemona as much as I do, I’d 			never agree to get married and lose my freedom at all. But look at 			those lights. Who’s coming?"
Those are the raisèd father and his friends.,"That’s her father and his friends, who’ve 			been roused out of bed. You’d better go inside."
"Not I, I must be 			found. My parts, my title, and my perfect soul Shall manifest me rightly. Is it they?","No, I must let them find me. My good qualities, my legal status as 			Desdemona’s husband, and my innocence will protect me. Is 			it them?"
"By Janus, I think no.",I don’t think so.
The servants of the Duke and my lieutenant? What is the news?,"The servants of the Duke and my lieutenant? Hello, everyone! 			What’s going on?"
"The Duke does 			greet you, general, And he requires your haste-post-haste appearance, Even on the instant.",The Duke sends his regards. He needs to see you right away.
"What’s 			the matter, think you?",What do you think he wants?
"Something from Cyprus as I may divine. Have sent a dozen sequent messengers This very night at one another’s heels, And many of the consuls, raised and met, Are at the Duke’s already. You have been hotly called 			for. The Senate hath sent about three several guests To search you out.","Something about Cyprus. I think it’s important. The 			warships have sent a dozen messages tonight, one after the other, 			and many of the senators have been awakened and are at the 			Duke’s already. They’re very anxious for you 			to get there. When you weren’t at home, the Senate sent 			out three different search parties to find you."
'Tis 			well I am found by you. I will but spend a word here in the house And go with you.,It’s good you found me. I’ll just speak a 			word or two here in the house and then I’ll go with 		 you.
"Ancient, what 			makes he here?","Ensign, what’s he doing in there?"
"If it prove lawful prize, he’s made for ever.","Tonight he boarded a treasure ship. If he can keep it, 			he’ll be set forever."
I do not understand.,I don’t understand.
He’s 			married.,He’s married.
To 			who?,To whom?
"Marry, to—",To—
"Come, captain, will you go?",Are you ready?
Have with you.,"Yes, I’ll go with you now."
Here comes another troop to seek for you.,Here comes another group looking for you.
"It is Brabantio. General, be advised, He comes to bad intent.","It’s Brabantio. Look out, sir. He intends to do 			something bad to you."
Holla! Stand 			there!,Hey! Stop right there!
"Signior, it is the Moor.","Sir, it’s the Moor."
"Down with him, 			thief!","Get him, he’s a thief!"
"You, Roderigo! Come, sir, I am for you.","You, Roderigo! Come on, I’ll fight you."
"Keep up your bright swords, for the dew will rust them. Good signior, you shall more command with years Than with your weapons.","Put away your swords. They’ll get rusty in the dew. 			Sir, your age and status inspire more respect than your weapons 		 do."
"O thou foul thief, where hast thou stowed my daughter? For I’ll refer me to all things of sense, If she in chains of magic were not bound, Whether a maid so tender, fair, and happy, So opposite to marriage that she shunned Would ever have, t' incur a general mock, Run from her guardage to the sooty bosom Of such a thing as thou—to fear, not to delight. Judge me the world if ’tis not gross in sense Abused her delicate youth with drugs or minerals That weakens motion. I’ll have ’t disputed 			on. 'Tis probable and palpable to thinking. I therefore apprehend and do attach thee Of arts inhibited and out of warrant.— Lay hold upon him. If he do resist, Subdue him at his peril!","You evil thief, where have you hidden my daughter? You devil, 			you’ve put a spell on her! Anybody with eyes could tell 			you that a beautiful and happy young girl like her, who’s 			refused to marry all of the handsome young men of the city, 			wouldn’t run off with a black thing like you unless 			she’d been bewitched. You’re something to 			fear, not to love. It’s obvious to everyone that 			you’ve tricked her, drugged her, or kidnapped her. 			That’s probably what happened, so I’m 			arresting you.—Arrest this man as a practitioner of black 			magic. Grab him. If he struggles, use force!"
"Hold your hands, Both you of my inclining and the rest. Without a prompter. Whither will you that I go To answer this your charge?",Just a minute. I don’t need anyone to tell me when to 			fight. You’ve accused me of some serious crimes. Where do 			you want me to go to respond to these charges?
"To 			prison, till fit time Of law and course of direct session Call thee to answer.","To prison, until you’re called into court."
What if I do obey? Whose messengers are here about my side Upon some present business of the state To bring me to him?,"What if I do what you say? How would I satisfy the Duke then? His 			messengers are waiting here to take me to him immediately, on 			pressing state business."
"'Tis 			true, most worthy signior. The Duke’s in council and your noble self,","It’s true. The Duke’s in a meeting right 			now, and he’s sent for you too."
"How? The Duke in 			council? In this time of the night? Bring him away. Mine’s not an idle cause. The Duke himself, Or any of my brothers of the state, Cannot but feel this wrong as ’twere their own. Bond-slaves and pagans shall our statesmen be.","The Duke’s in a meeting? At this time of night? Bring 			him with us. The law’s on my side. The Duke and any of my 			fellow senators will take this wrong as seriously as if it were 			their own. If we let crimes like this happen, slaves and heathens 			will be our rulers."
There’s no composition in this news That gives them credit.,These reports are inconsistent. You can’t trust 		 them.
"Indeed, they are disproportioned. My letters say a hundred and seven galleys.","It’s true, they’re inconsistent. My letters 			say there are a hundred and seven ships."
And mine a hundred and forty.,And mine say a hundred and forty.
"And mine, two 			hundred. But though they jump not on a just account— As in these cases, where the aim reports 'Tis oft with difference—yet do they all 			confirm A Turkish fleet, and bearing up to Cyprus.","And mine say two hundred. But often in these cases, reports are 			just estimates. The important thing is that they all say a Turkish 			fleet is approaching Cyprus."
"I do not so secure me in the error, But the main article I do approve In fearful sense.","Yes, we get the idea. The inconsistency doesn’t make me 			think that the reports are all wrong. I have no doubt about what 			they’re basically saying, and it’s 			frightening."
"(within) What, ho, what, 			ho, what, ho!","(offstage) Hello! Hey, 		 hello!"
A messenger from the galleys.,It’s a messenger from the warships.
"Now, what’s the business?",Why are you here?
"The Turkish preparation makes for Rhodes, So was I bid report here to the state By Signior Angelo.","Signor Angelo told me to come here and tell you that the Turkish 			fleet is heading for Rhodes, not Cyprus."
How say you by this change?,What do you think about this change?
"This cannot be, By no assay of reason. 'Tis a pageant, To keep us in false gaze. When we consider Th' importancy of Cyprus to the Turk, And let ourselves again but understand So may he with more facile question bear it, For that it stands not in such warlike brace But altogether lacks th' abilities That Rhodes is dressed in. If we make thought of this To leave that latest which concerns him first, Neglecting an attempt of ease and gain To wake and wage a danger profitless.","They can’t have changed; there’s no way this 			could be true. It’s a trick to confuse us. Think about 			how important Cyprus is to the Turks, and remember that they could 			capture Cyprus more easily, since it isn’t as well 			protected as Rhodes is. If we keep these things in mind, we 			can’t possibly imagine that the Turks would be so 			incompetent as to put off for last what they want to achieve first, 			setting aside something easy and profitable to do something 			dangerous and pointless."
"Nay, in all confidence, he’s not for Rhodes.","No, I think we can be confident that the Turks aren’t 			really headed for Rhodes."
Here is more news.,Here’s some more news coming in.
"The Ottomites, reverend and gracious, Steering with due course toward the isle of Rhodes, Have there injointed them with an after fleet.","Sir, the Turks sailed to Rhodes, where they joined with another 			fleet."
"Ay, so I thought. How many, as you guess?","That’s just what I thought. How many, can you 		 guess?"
"Their backward course, bearing with frank appearance Their purposes toward Cyprus. Signior Montano, Your trusty and most valiant servitor, With his free duty recommends you thus,","Thirty ships. Now they’ve turned around and are clearly 			heading for Cyprus. Signor Montano, your brave and loyal servant, 			gives you this information and asks you to send reinforcements to 			relieve him."
"'Tis 			certain then for Cyprus. Marcus Luccicos, is not he in town?",Then it’s certain they’re heading for 			Cyprus. Is Marcus Luccicos in town?
He’s now in Florence.,"No, he’s in Florence."
"Write from us to him. Post-post-haste, dispatch.",Write to him immediately. Hurry.
Here comes Brabantio and the valiant Moor.,Here come Brabantio and the brave Moor.
"Against the general enemy Ottoman— (to BRABANTIO) I did not see you. Welcome, gentle signior. We lacked your counsel and your help tonight.","Brave Othello, I have to send you right away to fight the Turks, 			our great enemy.—(to 			 BRABANTIO) Oh, I 			didn’t see you there. Welcome, sir. I could have used 			your wisdom and help tonight."
"So did I yours. Good your grace, pardon me. Hath raised me from my bed, nor doth the general care Take hold on me, for my particular grief Is of so flood-gate and o'erbearing nature That it engluts and swallows other sorrows","I could have used yours as well. Forgive me, your grace. I 			didn’t get out of bed and come here in the dead of night 			because I heard about the war or because I was worried about the 			city’s defense. I have a personal problem so painful and 			gut-wrenching that it overwhelms everything else."
"Why, what’s the matter?","Why, what’s the matter?"
"My daughter! Oh, my daughter!","It’s my daughter! Oh, my daughter!"
Dead?,Is she dead?
"Ay, 			to me. She is abused, stol'n from me, and corrupted By spells and medicines bought of mountebanks.","She’s dead to me. She’s been tricked and 			stolen from me, enchanted by black magic spells. She 			must’ve"
"Being not deficient, blind, or lame of sense, Sans witchcraft could not.","been tricked or drugged, because there’s no way she 			could have made this mistake on her own."
"Whoe'er he be that in this foul proceeding Hath thus beguiled your daughter of herself You shall yourself read in the bitter letter, After your own sense, yea, though our proper son Stood in your action.","Whoever tricked your daughter and stole her from you will pay for 			it. And you yourself will determine the sentence as you see fit, and 			impose the death penalty if you choose to, even if the criminal were 			my own son."
"Humbly I thank 			your grace. Here is the man, this Moor, whom now it seems, Hath hither brought.","I humbly thank you, sir. Here is the man, the Moor. It seems you 			had your own reasons for summoning him here."
We are very sorry 			for’t.,We’re sorry to hear this.
"(to OTHELLO)What, in your own part, can you say to this?",(to OTHELLO) What do you have to say for yourself?
"Nothing, but this is so.","Nothing, but this is true."
"Most potent, grave, and reverend signiors, That I have ta'en away this old man’s 			daughter, It is most true. True, I have married her. The very head and front of my offending Hath this extent, no more. Rude am I in my speech, For since these arms of mine had seven years' pith Till now some nine moons wasted, they have used Their dearest action in the tented field, And little of this great world can I speak,","Noble, honorable gentlemen whom I serve: it’s true that 			I’ve taken this man’s daughter from him and 			married her. But that’s my only offense. 			There’s nothing more. I’m awkward in my speech 			and I’m not a smooth talker. From the time I was seven 			years old until nine months ago I’ve been fighting in 			battles. I don’t know much about the world apart from 			fighting. So I won’t do myself much good by speaking in 			my own defense. But if you’ll let me, I’ll 			tell you the plain"
"And therefore little shall I grace my cause In speaking for myself. Yet, by your gracious patience, I will a round unvarnished tale deliver Of my whole course of love. What drugs, what charms, For such proceeding I am charged withal— I won his daughter.","story of how we fell in love, and what drugs, charms, spells, and 			powerful magic—because that’s what 			I’m being accused of—I used to win his 			daughter."
"A maiden never 			bold, Of spirit so still and quiet that her motion Blushed at herself. And she, in spite of nature, To fall in love with what she feared to look on? It is a judgment maimed and most imperfect That will confess perfection so could err. Against all rules of nature, and must be driven Why this should be. I therefore vouch again That with some mixtures powerful o'er the blood Or with some dram, conjured to this effect, He wrought upon her.","She’s a good girl, quiet and obedient. She blushes at 			the slightest thing. And you want me to believe that despite her 			young age and proper upbringing she fell in love with a man 			she’d be afraid to look at? The very thought of it is 			ridiculous. You’d have to be stupid to think that someone 			so perfect could make such an unnatural mistake as that. The devil 			must be behind this. Therefore I say again that he must have used 			some powerful drug or magic potion on her."
"To vouch this is 			no proof, Than these thin habits and poor likelihoods Of modern seeming do prefer against him.","Your saying this isn’t proof. There has to be clear 			evidence that he’s done this, not just these 		 accusations."
"But, Othello, speak. Did you by indirect and forcèd courses Or came it by request and such fair question As soul to soul affordeth?","Tell us, Othello. Did you trick or deceive this lady in some way? 			Or did you agree to this as equals?"
"I do beseech you, Send for the lady to the Sagittary,","Please, send for Desdemona to come here from the Sagittarius Inn 			and ask her to speak about me in front"
"And let her speak of me before her father. The trust, the office I do hold of you, Not only take away, but let your sentence Even fall upon my life.","of her father. If she has anything bad to say about me, then you 			can sentence me to death."
Fetch Desdemona 			hither.,Bring Desdemona here.
"Ancient, conduct them. You best know the place.","Iago, bring Desdemona here. You know where she is."
I do confess the vices of my blood So justly to your grave ears I’ll present How I did thrive in this fair lady’s love And she in mine.,"In the meantime I’ll tell you all, as honestly as I 			confess my sins to God, how I wooed this beautiful lady, and how she 			came to love me."
"Say it, 		 Othello.","Tell us, Othello."
"Still questioned me the story of my life From year to year, the battles, sieges, fortunes, That I have passed. I ran it through, even from my boyish days, Wherein I spoke of most disastrous chances, Of moving accidents by flood and field, Of hair-breadth ’scapes i' th' 			imminent deadly breach, Of being taken by the insolent foe And portance in my traveler’s history. Wherein of antres vast and deserts idle, Rough quarries, rocks, hills whose heads touch heaven It was my hint to speak—such was my process—","Her father loved me and used to invite me to his house often, 			continually asking me about my life and all the battles 			I’ve fought. I told him everything, from my boyhood up 			until the time when I was talking to him. I told him about 			unfortunate disasters, hair-raising adventures on sea and on land, 			and near-catastrophes and dangerous adventures I’ve been 			through. I told him how I was captured and sold as a slave, how I 			bought my freedom, and how I wandered through caves and deserts. I 			was able to tell him about cannibals who eat each other, and men 			with heads growing below their shoulders. When I talked about all 			these things, Desdemona used to listen attentively. If she had to go 			do some household chore, I noticed that she’d always come 			back quickly to hear more of my stories."
"The Anthropophagi, and men whose heads Grew beneath their shoulders. These things to hear Would Desdemona seriously incline. But still the house affairs would draw her hence, She’d come again, and with a greedy ear Devour up my discourse, which I, observing, Took once a pliant hour and found good means To draw from her a prayer of earnest heart Whereof by parcels she had something heard But not intentively. I did consent, And often did beguile her of her tears When I did speak of some distressful stroke She gave me for my pains a world of sighs. She swore, in faith, ’twas strange, ’twas 			passing strange, 'Twas pitiful, ’twas wondrous pitiful. She wished she had not heard it, yet she wished And bade me, if I had a friend that loved her, I should but teach him how to tell my story And that would woo her. Upon this hint I spake. She loved me for the dangers I had passed, This only is the witchcraft I have used. Here comes the lady. Let her witness it.","When I was relaxing, she’d pull me aside and ask to 			hear some part of a story she had missed. Her eyes would fill with 			tears at the bad things I went through in my younger years. When my 			stories were done, she’d sigh and tell me how strangely 			wonderful and sad my life had been. She said she wished she 			hadn’t heard it, but she also wished there was a man like 			me for her. She thanked me and told me that if a friend of mine had 			a story like mine to tell, she’d fall in love with him. I 			took the hint and spoke to her. She said she loved me for the 			dangers I’d survived, and I loved her for feeling such 			strong emotions about me. That’s the only witchcraft I 			ever used. Here comes my wife now. She’ll confirm 			everything."
I think this tale would win my daughter too. Good Brabantio. Take up this mangled matter at the best. Than their bare hands.,"I think a story like that would win my own daughter over. 			Brabantio, I urge you to make the best of this. Try to accept 			what’s happened."
"I pray you, hear 			her speak. If she confess that she was half the wooer, Destruction on my head if my bad blame Light on the man.—Come hither, gentle mistress. Where most you owe obedience?","Please let her speak. If she admits she wanted this, then I 			won’t blame Othello.—Come here, my child. Who 			do you obey here?"
"My 			noble father, I do perceive here a divided duty. To you I am bound for life and education. My life and education both do learn me I am hitherto your daughter. But here’s my husband. And so much duty as my mother showed To you, preferring you before her father, So much I challenge that I may profess","Father, this isn’t easy for me. I’m torn. I 			owe you respect because you gave me life and education. 			You’re the one I have to obey. I’m your 			daughter. But this man here is my husband now, and I owe him as much 			as my mother owed you, just as she preferred you to her own father. 			So I have to give my obedience to the Moor, my husband."
"God be with you. I have done. Please it your grace, on to the state affairs. I had rather to adopt a child than get it.— Come hither, Moor. I here do give thee that with all my heart I would keep from thee. For your sake, jewel, I am glad at soul I have no other child. For thy escape would teach me tyranny, To hang clogs on them.—I have done, my lord.","I’m finished, then. Duke, please go ahead with your 			state business. I’d rather adopt a child than have one of 			my own.—Come here, Moor. I’m forced to give my 			blessing to this marriage. With all my heart, I give you that thing 			which, if you didn’t already have it, I’d try 			with all my heart to keep from you. Desdemona, I’m glad 			you’re my only child, since if I had others 			I’d keep them all locked up. You would have made me treat 			them like a tyrant.—I’m done, my lord."
"Which, as a grise or step, may help these lovers. When remedies are past, the griefs are ended By seeing the worst, which late on hopes depended.","Let me refer to a proverb that may help you forgive these lovers: 			if you can’t change something, don’t cry about 			it. When you lament something bad that’s already 			happened, you’re setting yourself up for more"
"To mourn a mischief that is past and gone What cannot be preserved when fortune takes, Patience her injury a mock'ry makes. The robbed that smiles steals something from the thief, He robs himself that spends a bootless grief.","bad news. A robbery victim who can smile about his losses is 			superior to the thief who robbed him, but if he cries 			he’s just wasting time."
"We lose it not, so long as we can smile. He bears the sentence well that nothing bears But the free comfort which from thence he hears. But he bears both the sentence and the sorrow These sentences to sugar or to gall, Being strong on both sides, are equivocal. But words are words. I never yet did hear That the bruised heart was piercèd through the ears.","So if the Turks steal Cyprus from us, it won’t be bad 			as long as we keep smiling. It’s easy to accept 			platitudes like that if you haven’t lost anything. But 			I’ve lost something precious, and I have to put up with 			the platitude as well as suffering my loss. Talk is cheap. 			I’ve never heard of someone feeling better because of 			someone else’s words. Please, I’m asking you, 			go ahead and get back to your state affairs."
"The Turk with a most mighty preparation makes for Cyprus. Othello, 			the fortitude of the place is best known to you, and though we have 			there a substitute of most allowed sufficiency, yet opinion, a 			sovereign mistress of effects, throws a more safer voice on you. You 			must therefore be content to slubber the gloss of your new fortunes 			with this more stubborn and boist'rous expedition.","The Turks are heading for Cyprus with a powerful fleet. Othello, 			you understand better than anyone how the defenses for Cyprus work. 			Even though we have a very good officer in charge there already, 			everyone says you’re the better man for the job. So 			I’ll have to ask you to put a damper on your marriage 			celebrations and take part in this dangerous expedition."
"The tyrant custom, most grave senators, Hath made the flinty and steel couch of war My thrice-driven bed of down. I do agnize I find in hardness, and do undertake These present wars against the Ottomites. Most humbly therefore bending to your state,","I’ve gotten used to the hardships of a military life. I 			rise to the occasion when faced with difficulties. I will take 			charge of this war against the Turks. But I humbly ask you to make 			appropriate arrangements for my wife,"
I crave fit disposition for my wife. With such accommodation and besort As levels with her breeding.,giving her a place to live and people to keep her company that 			suit her high rank.
"Why, at her father’s.",She can stay at her father’s house.
I’ll not have it so.,I won’t allow it.
Nor I.,Neither will I.
"Nor would I there reside, To put my father in impatient thoughts By being in his eye. Most gracious Duke, To my unfolding lend your prosperous ear T' assist my simpleness.","And I wouldn’t stay there. I don’t want to 			upset my father by being in his house. Dear Duke, please listen to 			what I have to say."
"What would you, Desdemona?","What do you want to do, Desdemona?"
"That I did love the Moor to live with him, My downright violence and storm of fortunes Even to the very quality of my lord. I saw Othello’s visage in his mind, And to his honors and his valiant parts Did I my soul and fortunes consecrate. A moth of peace and he go to the war, The rites for which I love him are bereft me, And I a heavy interim shall support By his dear absence. Let me go with him.","When I fell in love with Othello I made up my mind that I wanted 			to live with him. You can see how much I wanted to be with him by 			how violently I threw away my old life. I feel like I’m a 			part of him now, and that means I’m part of a soldier. I 			saw Othello’s true face when I saw his mind. I gave my 			whole life to him because of his honor and bravery. If I were left 			at home uselessly while he went off to war, then I’m 			separated from my husband in his natural element. I’d be 			miserable without him. Let me go with him."
"Vouch with me, heaven, I therefore beg it not To please the palate of my appetite,","Please allow her to do this. I’m not asking to have her 			near me for sex—I’m too old for that, and my 			sexual"
"Nor to comply with heat the young affects In my defunct and proper satisfaction, And heaven defend your good souls, that you think I will your serious and great business scant When she is with me. No, when light-winged toys Of feathered Cupid seel with wanton dullness That my disports corrupt and taint my business, Let housewives make a skillet of my helm And all indign and base adversities Make head against my estimation.","urges are dead. I want this because she wants it—I love 			her for her mind. And I’d never want you to think that 			I’d neglect my serious official duties while she was 			there with me. If I ever let love blind me so that I choose to 			lounge around in bed with my loved one instead of going off to war, 			then you can let a housewife use my helmet as a frying pan. My 			reputation would be disgraced if I ever acted like that."
Either for her stay or going. Th' affair cries haste And speed must answer it.,You can decide that privately. I don’t care whether she 			stays or goes. What’s important is the urgency of this 			mission. You’ve got to act fast.
You must away 			tonight.,You’ll have to leave tonight.
With all my heart.,"With all my heart, I’ll go right away."
"At nine i' th' morning here we’ll 			meet again. And he shall our commission bring to you, And such things else of quality and respect As doth import you.","We’ll meet again at nine in the morning. Othello, have 			one of your officers stay behind to bring you your commission and 			whatever else is important to you."
"So please your 			grace, my ancient. A man he is of honesty and trust. With what else needful your good grace shall think To be sent after me.","My lord, my ensign is an honest and trustworthy man. 			He’ll accompany my wife, and bring whatever else you 			think I might need."
"Let it be so. Good night to every one.—(to BRABANTIO) And, noble signior, Your son-in-law is far more fair than black.","All right, then. Good night, everyone.—(to BRABANTIO) Sir, if goodness is beautiful, your son-in-law is 			beautiful, not black."
"Adieu, brave Moor. Use Desdemona well.","Goodbye, black Moor. Treat Desdemona well."
"Look to her, Moor, if thou hast eyes to see. She has deceived her father, and may thee.","Keep an eye on her, Moor. She lied to me, and she may lie to 		 you."
"My Desdemona must I leave to thee. I prithee, let thy wife attend on her, And bring them after in the best advantage. Come, Desdemona, I have but an hour To spend with thee. We must obey the time.","I’d bet my life she’d never lie to me. Iago, 			I’m leaving my dear Desdemona with you. Have your wife 			attend to her, and bring them along as soon as you can. Come on, 			Desdemona, I’ve only got an hour of love to spend with 			you, to tell you what you need to do. We’re on a tight 			schedule."
Iago.,Iago.
"What say’st thou, noble heart?","What do you have to say, noble friend?"
"What will I do, think’st thou?",What do you think I should do?
"Why, go to bed, and sleep.","Go to bed, and sleep."
I will incontinently drown myself.,I’m going to go drown myself.
"If thou dost I shall never love thee after. Why, thou silly 			gentleman!","If you do that, I’ll never respect you again. Why, you 			silly man!"
"It is silliness to live when to live is torment, and then have we 			a prescription to die when death is our physician.",It’s silly to live when life is torture. The only cure 			is death.
"Oh, villainous! I have looked upon the world for four times seven 			years, and since I could distinguish betwixt a benefit and an injury 			I never found man that knew how to love himself. Ere I would say I 			would drown myself for the love of a guinea hen, I would change my 			humanity with a baboon.","Oh, how stupid! I’ve been alive for twenty-eight years, 			and I’ve never met a man who knew what was good for him. 			I’d rather be a baboon than kill myself out of love for 			some woman I can’t have."
"What should I do? I confess it is my shame to be so fond, but it 			is not in my virtue to amend it.","What should I do? I know it’s foolish to be so much in 			love, but I can’t help it."
"Virtue? A fig! 'Tis in ourselves that we are thus or 			thus. Our bodies are our gardens, to the which our wills are 			gardeners. So that if we will plant nettles or sow lettuce, set 			hyssop and weed up thyme, supply it with one gender of herbs or 			distract it with many—either to have it sterile with 			idleness, or manured with industry—why, the power and 			corrigible authority of this lies in our wills. If the balance of 			our lives had not one scale of reason to poise another of 			sensuality, the blood and baseness of our natures would conduct us 			to most prepost'rous conclusions. But we have reason to 			cool our raging motions, our carnal stings, our unbitted lusts. 			Whereof I take this that you call love to be a sect or scion.","Can’t help it? Nonsense! What we are is up to us. Our 			bodies are like gardens and our willpower is like the gardener. 			Depending on what we plant—weeds or lettuce, or one kind 			of herb rather than a variety, the garden will either be barren and 			useless, or rich and productive. If we didn’t have 			rational minds to counterbalance our emotions and desires, our 			bodily urges would take over. We’d end up in ridiculous 			situations. Thankfully, we have reason to cool our raging lusts. In 			my opinion, what you call love is just an offshoot of lust."
It cannot be.,I don’t believe it.
"It is merely a lust of the blood and a permission of the will. 			Come, be a man. Drown thyself? Drown cats and blind puppies! I have 			professed me thy friend, and I confess me knit to thy deserving with 			cables of perdurable toughness.","You feel love because you feel lust and you have no willpower. 			Come on, be a man. Drown yourself? Drowning is for cats or blind 			puppies—don’t drown yourself! I’ve 			told you I’m your friend, and I’ll stick 			by you."
"I could 			never better stead thee than now. Put money in thy purse. Follow 			thou the wars, defeat thy favor with an usurped beard. I say, put 			money in thy purse. It cannot be long that Desdemona should continue 			her love to the Moor—put money in thy 			purse—nor he his to her. It was a violent commencement in 			her, and thou shalt see an answerable sequestration—put 			but money in thy purse. These Moors are changeable in their 			wills—fill thy purse with money. The food that to him now 			is as luscious as locusts shall be to him shortly as bitter as 			coloquintida. She must change for youth. When she is sated with his 			body she will find the errors of her choice. Therefore, put money in 			thy purse. If thou wilt needs damn thyself, do it a more delicate 			way than drowning. Make all the money thou canst. If sanctimony and 			a frail vow betwixt an erring barbarian and supersubtle Venetian be 			not too hard for my wits and all the tribe of hell, thou shalt enjoy 			her. Therefore make money. A pox of drowning thyself! 			'Tis clean out of the way. Seek thou rather to be hanged 			in compassing thy joy than to be drowned and go without her.","I’ve never been more useful to you than I will be 			now. Here’s what you’ll do. Sell all your 			assets and your land, and turn it into cash. Desdemona 			can’t continue loving the Moor any more than he can 			continue loving her. She fell in love with him very suddenly, and 			they’ll break up just as suddenly. Moors are moody 			people.—So sell your lands and raise a lot of cash. What 			seems sweet to him now will soon turn bitter. She’ll dump 			Othello for a younger man. When she’s had enough of the 			Moor’s body, she’ll realize her mistake. 			She’ll need to have a new lover. She’ll have 			to have it. So have your money ready. If you want to go to hell, 			there are better ways to do it than killing yourself. Raise all the 			money you can. I can get the better of religion and a few flimsy 			vows between a misguided barbarian and a depraved Venetian girl. 			You’ll get to sleep with her—just put together 			some money. And to hell with drowning yourself! That’s 			completely beside the point. If you’re ready to die, you 			can risk death by committing crimes in an attempt to get the woman 			you want. Don’t just give up on her and drown 		 yourself."
"Wilt thou be fast to my hopes, if I depend on the issue?",Can I count on you if I wait to see what happens?
"Thou art sure of me. Go, make money. I have told thee often, and I 			re-tell thee again and again, I hate the Moor. My cause is hearted. 			Thine hath no less reason. Let us be conjunctive in our revenge 			against him. If thou canst cuckold him, thou dost thyself a 			pleasure, me a sport. There are many events in the womb of time 			which will be delivered. Traverse, go, provide thy money. We will 			have more of this tomorrow. Adieu.","You can trust me. Go now and get cash. I told you before, and 			I’ll tell you again and again: I hate the Moor. 			I’m devoted to my cause of hating him, just as devoted as 			you are to yours. So let’s join forces and get revenge. 			If you seduce Desdemona and make a fool out of him, it’ll 			be fun for both of us. Many things may happen. Go get money. 			We’ll speak again tomorrow. Goodbye."
Where shall we meet i' th' morning?,Where will we meet in the morning?
At 			my lodging.,At my house.
I’ll be with thee betimes.,I’ll be there early.
"Go to, farewell. Do you hear, Roderigo?","Go home. Goodbye. Oh, and one more thing—"
What say you?,What is it?
"No more of drowning, do you hear?","No more talk about killing yourself, okay?"
I am changed.,I’ve changed my mind about that.
"Go to, farewell. Put money enough in your purse.","Go then, goodbye. Put a lot of cash together."
I’ll sell all my land.,I’m going to sell all my land.
"For I mine own gained knowledge should profane If I would time expend with such a snipe But for my sport and profit. I hate the Moor, And it is thought abroad that ’twixt my sheets But I, for mere suspicion in that kind, Will do as if for surety. He holds me well. The better shall my purpose work on him. Cassio’s a proper man. Let me see now,","That’s how I always do it, getting money from fools. 			I’d be wasting my skills dealing with an idiot like that 			if I couldn’t get something useful out of him. I hate the 			Moor, and there’s a widespread rumor that he’s 			slept with my wife. I’m not sure it’s true, 			but just the suspicion is enough for me. He thinks highly of me. 			That’ll help. Cassio’s a handsome man. 			Let’s see, how can I"
"In double knavery. How? How? Let’s see. After some time, to abuse Othello’s ear That he is too familiar with his wife. He hath a person and a smooth dispose The Moor is of a free and open nature That thinks men honest that but seem to be so, And will as tenderly be led by th' nose As asses are. Must bring this monstrous birth to the world’s 		 light.","get his position and use him to hurt Othello at the same time? 			How? How? Let’s see. After a while I’ll start 			telling Othello that Cassio is too intimate with Desdemona. Cassio 			is a smooth talker and a good-looking guy, the sort of man that 			people would expect to be a seducer. The Moor is open and 			straightforward. He thinks any man who seems honest is honest. 			People like that are easy to manipulate. So it’s all 			decided. I’ve worked it out. With a little help from the 			devil, I’ll bring this monstrous plan to success."
What from the cape can you discern at sea?,What can you see out on the ocean?
Nothing at all. It is a high-wrought flood. I cannot ’twixt the heaven and the main Descry a sail.,"Nothing. The water’s so rough that I can’t 			see any sails, either in the bay or on the ocean."
"A fuller blast ne'er shook our battlements. If it hath ruffianed so upon the sea What ribs of oak, when mountains melt on them, Can hold the mortise? What shall we hear of this?",It was windy on shore too. A big blast of wind shook our 			fortifications. How could a ship made out of wood hold together in 			those mountainous waves? What do you think will be the result of 			this storm?
"For do but stand upon the foaming shore, The chidden billow seems to pelt the clouds, The wind-shaked surge, with high and monstrous mane, Seems to cast water on the burning bear, I never did like molestation view On the enchafèd flood.",The Turkish navy will be broken up. The wind’s whipping 			up the waves so high you expect them to reach the clouds and splash 			against the stars in the sky. I’ve never seen the waters 			so disturbed.
"If that the Turkish fleet Be not ensheltered and embayed, they are drowned.","If the Turkish fleet isn’t protected in some harbor, 			their men must all be drowned. No ship could survive this 		 storm."
"News, lads, Our wars are done! The desperate tempest hath so banged the Turks, That their designment halts. A noble ship of Venice Hath seen a grievous wreck and sufferance","I’ve got news, boys, the war’s over! This 			terrible storm has smashed the Turks so badly that their plans are 			ruined. One of our ships has reported that it saw most of their 			fleet shipwrecked."
How? Is this true?,What? Is this true?
"The ship is here 			put in, A Veronesa. Michael Cassio, Lieutenant to the warlike Moor Othello, Is come on shore. The Moor himself at sea","The ship’s sailing into harbor now; it’s 			from Verona. Michael Cassio, lieutenant of the Moor Othello, has 			arrived on shore. The Moor himself is still at sea. He’s 			been commissioned to come here to Cyprus."
I am glad on ’t. 'Tis a worthy 		 governor.,I’m happy about that. He’ll be a good 			governor.
"But this same Cassio, though he speak of comfort Touching the Turkish loss, yet he looks sadly And prays the Moor be safe. For they were parted","Cassio brings good news about the Turkish defeat, but 			he’s worried about the Othello’s safety. The 			two of them were separated during the storm."
"Pray 			heavens he be, For I have served him, and the man commands Like a full soldier. Let’s to the seaside, ho! As well to see the vessel that’s come in As to throw out our eyes for brave Othello, An indistinct regard.","I hope to God Othello’s all right. I served under him, 			and I know what an excellent commander he is. Let’s go to 			the shore to get a look at the ship that came in, and to look out 			for Othello’s ship. We’ll stare out at the sea 			until the sea and the sky blur together."
"Come, 			let’s do so. For every minute is expectancy Of more arrivance.",Let’s do that. Every minute we expect more ships to 			arrive.
"Thanks, you the valiant of this warlike isle Give him defense against the elements, For I have lost him on a dangerous sea.","Thanks, you brave men who defend this island and respect Othello. 			I hope heaven protects him from the weather, because I lost sight of 			him on the stormy sea."
Is he well shipped?,Is his ship sturdy?
"His bark is stoutly timbered and his pilot Therefore my hopes, not surfeited to death, Stand in bold cure.","Yes, it’s well built, and the ship’s pilot 			is very expert and experienced. For that reason I still have some 			hope for him, even though I don’t have my hopes up too 			high."
"(within) A sail, a sail, a 		 sail!",(offstage) A sail! A sail! A 		 sail!
What noise?,What’s all that shouting about?
"Stand ranks of people, and they cry “A 			sail!”",Everybody in town is down at the shore shouting “A 			sail!”
My hopes do shape him for the governor.,I hope it’s Othello.
They do discharge their shot of courtesy. Our friends at least.,"They’ve fired a greeting shot, so at least 			it’s a friendly ship."
And give us truth who ’tis that is arrived.,Please go find out for certain who has arrived.
I shall.,I’ll do that.
"But good lieutenant, is your general wived?","Good lieutenant, is your general married?"
"Most fortunately. He hath achieved a maid One that excels the quirks of blazoning pens, And in th' essential vesture of creation Does tire the ingener.","Yes, and he’s very lucky to have married the woman he 			did. His wife defies description. She’s God’s 			masterpiece, and she’d exhaust whoever tried to do her 			justice while praising her."
How now? Who has put in?,Who’s arrived in the harbor?
"'Tis one Iago, ancient to the general.","A man named Iago, the general’s ensign."
"He’s had most favorable and happy speed. Tempests themselves, high seas, and howling winds, The guttered rocks and congregated sands, Traitors ensteeped to enclog the guiltless keel, Their mortal natures, letting go safely by The divine Desdemona.","He made good time. You see how the storm, the jagged rocks, and 			the sand banks that trap ships all appreciate a beautiful woman. 			They let the heavenly Desdemona arrive safe and sound."
What is she?,Who’s that?
"She that I spake of, our great captain’s captain, Whose footing here anticipates our thoughts A se'nnight’s speed. Great Jove, Othello 			guard, And swell his sail with thine own powerful breath, That he may bless this bay with his tall ship, Give renewed fire to our extincted spirits And bring all Cyprus comfort!","She’s the one I was talking about, the 			general’s wife. The brave Iago was put in charge of 			bringing her here, and he’s arrived a week sooner than we 			expected. Dear God, please protect Othello and help him arrive here 			safely, so he and Desdemona can be in each other’s arms, 			and Othello can cheer us up and bring comfort to Cyprus."
"Oh, behold, The riches of the ship is come on shore! You men of Cyprus, let her have your knees. Before, behind thee, and on every hand, Enwheel thee round!","Look, the precious Desdemona has arrived on shore. We should all 			kneel before her, men of Cyprus! Greetings, my lady, and may God 			always be with you."
"I thank you, valiant Cassio. What tidings can you tell me of my lord?","Thank you, brave Cassio. Is there any news about my 		 husband?"
But that he’s well and will be shortly here.,"He hasn’t arrived yet. As far as I know, 			he’s okay and will arrive here soon."
"Oh, but I fear. How lost you company?","Oh, but I’m worried. How did you two get 		 separated?"
The great contention of the sea and skies Parted our fellowship—,The storm separated us.
"(within) A sail, a sail!",(offstage) A sail! A sail!
"But, hark! a sail.","Listen, they’ve spotted another ship!"
They give this greeting to the citadel. This likewise is a friend.,"They fired a greeting shot too, so this is also a friendly 		 ship."
See for the 		 news.,Go find out the news.
"Good ancient, you are welcome.—Welcome, mistress. Let it not gall your patience, good Iago, That I extend my manners. 'Tis my breeding That gives me this bold show of courtesy.","Ensign Iago, welcome.—And welcome to you, too, madam. 			 (he kisses EMILIA) Don’t be upset that I 			kissed your wife hello, Iago. It’s a courtesy where I 			come from."
"Sir, would she give you so much of her lips You’ll have enough.","If she gave you as much lip as she gives me, you’d be 			sick of her by now."
"Alas, she has no speech!","On the contrary, she’s a soft-spoken woman."
"In faith, too much. I find it still, when I have leave to sleep. She puts her tongue a little in her heart And chides with thinking.","No, she talks too much. She’s always talking when I 			want to sleep. I admit that in front of you, my lady, she keeps a 			bit quiet. But she’s scolding me silently."
You have little 			cause to say so.,You have no reason to say that.
"Come on, come on. You are pictures out of door, bells in your 			parlors, wild-cats in your kitchens, saints in your injuries, devils 			being offended, players in your housewifery, and housewives in your 			beds.","Come on, come on. You women are all the same. You’re as 			pretty as pictures when you’re out in public, but in your 			own houses you’re as noisy as jangling bells. In your own 			kitchens you act like wildcats. You make yourselves sound like 			saints when you’re complaining about something, but you 			act like devils when someone offends you. You don’t take 			your jobs as housewives seriously, and you’re shameless 			hussies in bed."
"Oh, fie upon thee, slanderer!","Shame on you, you slanderer!"
You rise to play and go to bed to work.,"No, it’s true, or if it’s not, 			I’m a villain. You wake up to have fun, and you start 			work when you go to bed."
You shall not write my praise.,You clearly have nothing good to say about me.
"No, let me 		 not.","No, I don’t."
"What wouldst thou write of me, if thou should’st praise 			me?","But if you had to say something nice about me, what would you 		 say?"
"O gentle lady, do not put me to ’t,","Don’t make me do it, my lady. I’m critical 			by nature."
"Come on, assay. There’s one gone to the harbor?","Come on, just try.—By the way, has someone gone down to 			the harbor?"
"Ay, madam.","Yes, madam."
"I am not merry, but I do beguile The thing I am by seeming otherwise.","I’m not as happy as I seem. I’m just trying 			not to show how worried I am about Othello’s safety. Come 			on, what would you say about me?"
"I am about it, but indeed my invention Comes from my pate as birdlime does from frieze, It plucks out brains and all. But my Muse labors And thus she is delivered: The one’s for use, the other useth it.","I’m trying to think of something, but I’m 			not good at inventing clever things. It takes time. Ah, 			I’ve got it. If a woman is pretty and smart, she uses her 			good looks to get what she wants."
Well praised! How if she be black and witty?,Very clever! But what if the woman is smart but ugly?
"If she be black, and thereto have a wit, She’ll find a white that shall her blackness 		 fit.","Even if she’s ugly, she’ll be smart enough 			to find a guy to sleep with her."
Worse and worse!,This is getting worse and worse!
How if fair and 			foolish?,What if she’s pretty but stupid?
"She never yet was foolish that was fair, For even her folly helped her to an heir.","No pretty woman is stupid, because her stupidity will make her 			more attractive to men."
These are old fond paradoxes to make fools laugh i' 			th' alehouse. What miserable praise hast thou for her That’s foul and foolish?,These are stupid old jokes that men tell each other in bars. What 			horrible thing do you have to say about a woman who’s 			both ugly and stupid?
But does foul pranks which fair and wise ones do.,"No matter how ugly or stupid the woman is, she plays the same 			dirty tricks that the smart and pretty ones do."
"Oh, heavy ignorance! Thou praisest the worst best. But what praise 			couldst thou bestow on a deserving woman indeed, one that in the 			authority of her merit did justly put on the vouch of very malice 			itself?","You don’t know a thing! You give your best praise to 			the worst women. But how would you praise a truly good woman, 			someone who had no reason to worry about what anyone said about 		 her?"
"She that was ever fair and never proud, Had tongue at will and yet was never loud, Fled from her wish and yet said “Now I may,” She that being angered, her revenge being nigh, Bade her wrong stay and her displeasure fly, She that in wisdom never was so frail She that could think and ne'er disclose her mind, See suitors following and not look behind, She was a wight, if ever such wights were—","A woman who was beautiful but never proud, who could speak well 			but knew when to be quiet, who dressed well but was never 			overdressed, who had self-restraint even when she could get what she 			wanted, a woman who never took revenge, who overlooked it when 			people hurt her, who was too wise to do anything stupid, who could 			think without revealing her thoughts, and who could refrain from 			flirting with men in love with her, that kind of woman, if she ever 			existed, would—"
To do what?,Would do what?
To suckle fools and chronicle small beer.,Would raise babies and clip coupons.
"Oh, most lame and impotent conclusion! Do not learn of him, 			Emilia, though he be thy husband. How say you, Cassio? Is he not a 			most profane and liberal counselor?","Oh, that’s pathetic! Don’t listen to him, 			Emilia, even though he’s your husband. What do you think 			about him, Cassio? Isn’t he a horrible man?"
"He speaks home, madam. You may relish him more in the soldier than 			in the scholar.","He speaks bluntly, madam. He’s more of a soldier than a 			wise man."
"(aside) He takes her by the palm. 			Ay, well said, whisper! With as little a web as this will I ensnare 			as great a fly as Cassio. Ay, smile upon her, do, I will gyve thee 			in thine own courtship. You say true, 'Tis so, indeed.","(to himself) He’s taking 			her hand. That’s right, go ahead and whisper together. 			This is all I need to get Cassio. Yes, keep smiling at her, Cassio. Your fine manners around 			women will be your downfall. Oh, I’m sure 			you’re saying something very clever."
"If 		 such tricks as these strip you out of your lieutenantry, it had been better you had not 			kissed your three fingers so oft, which now again you are most apt 			to play the sir in. Very good, well kissed, and excellent courtesy! 			’tis so, indeed. Yet again your fingers to your lips? 			Would they were clyster-pipes for your sake!—","If you lose your job 			because of little flirtations like this, you’ll wish you 			hadn’t been so courteous with her. Oh, how nice, 			you’re kissing A gentleman’s kissing his own fingers was considered a polite gesture. kissing your own hand, one finger at a time? I wish those fingers 			were enema tubes!—"
The Moor! I know his trumpet.,That’s the Moor! I recognize his trumpet.
'Tis 			truly so.,"Yes, it is."
Let’s meet him and receive him.,Let’s go greet him when he lands.
"Lo, where he 			comes!","Look, here he comes."
Oh my fair warrior!,My beautiful warrior!
My dear 		 Othello!,My darling Othello!
"It gives me wonder great as my content To see you here before me. Oh, my soul’s joy! May the winds blow till they have wakened death, And let the laboring bark climb hills of seas Olympus-high, and duck again as low As hell’s from heaven! If it were now to die, My soul hath her content so absolute That not another comfort like to this Succeeds in unknown fate.","I’m amazed you got here before me. But I’m 			overjoyed! My love, if the calm after the storm could always be this 			wonderful, I’d want the wind to blow until it waked the 			dead, and whipped up waves as tall as mountains! If I died right now 			I’d be completely happy, since I’ll probably 			never be as happy as this again in my life."
"The heavens 		 forbid But that our loves and comforts should increase,","God willing, our love and our happiness will only increase as we 			get older."
"Amen to that, 			sweet powers! I cannot speak enough of this content. It stops me here, it is too much of joy. And this, and this, the greatest discords be (kissing her) That e'er our hearts shall make!",Amen to that! I can’t talk about my happiness anymore. 			It’s too much. I hope these kisses I’m about 			to give you are the closest we ever come to fighting.(they kiss)
"Oh, you are well 			tuned now, But I’ll set down the pegs that make this music, As honest as I am.","(to himself) Oh, you’re 			happy now, but I’ll ruin your happiness, for all my 			supposed honesty."
"Come, let us to 			the castle. News, friends! Our wars are done, the Turks are drowned. How does my old acquaintance of this isle?— I have found great love amongst them. O my sweet, I prattle out of fashion, and I dote In mine own comforts.—I prithee, good Iago, Go to the bay and disembark my coffers. He is a good one, and his worthiness Does challenge much respect.—Come, Desdemona, Once more, well met at Cyprus.","Let’s go up to the castle. Good news, friends. The 			war’s over and the Turks are drowned. How are my old 			friends from this island doing?—Honey, they’ll 			love you here in Cyprus. They’ve been very good to me 			here. Oh, my dear, I’m blabbing on and on because 			I’m so happy.—Iago, would you be good enough 			to go get my trunks from the ships? And bring the ship’s 			captain to the castle. He’s a good 			man.—Let’s go, Desdemona. I’ll say 			it again: I’m so happy to see you here in Cyprus!"
"Do thou meet me presently at the harbor.—Come hither. 			If thou be’st valiant, as they say base men being in love 			have then a nobility in their natures more than is native to them, 			list me. The lieutenant tonight watches on the court of guard. 			First, I must tell thee this: Desdemona is directly in love with 			him.","Meet me down at the harbor.—Come here. They say love 			makes cowards brave. So if you’re brave, listen to me. 			Lieutenant Cassio will be on guard duty tonight. But first, I have 			to tell you that Desdemona’s completely in love with 		 him."
"With him? Why, ’tis not possible.",With Cassio? That’s impossible.
"Lay thy finger thus, and let thy soul be instructed. Mark me with 			what violence she first loved the Moor, but for bragging and telling 			her fantastical lies. To love him still for prating? Let not thy 			discreet heart think it. Her eye must be fed, and what delight shall 			she have to look on the devil? When the blood is made dull with the 			act of sport, there should be a game to inflame it and to give 			satiety a fresh appetite, loveliness in favor, sympathy in years, 			manners and beauties. All which the Moor is defective in. Now for 			want of these required conveniences, her delicate tenderness will 			find itself abused, begin to heave the gorge, disrelish and abhor 			the Moor. Very nature will instruct her in it and compel her to some 			second choice. Now sir, this granted—as it is a most 			pregnant and unforced position—who stands so eminent in 			the degree of this fortune as Cassio does? A knave very voluble, no 			further conscionable than in putting on the mere form of civil and 			humane seeming, for the better compassing of his salt and most 			hidden loose affection. Why, none, why, none! A slipper and subtle 			knave, a finder of occasions that has an eye, can stamp and 			counterfeit advantages, though true advantage never present itself. 			A devilish knave. Besides, the knave is handsome, young, and hath 			all those requisites in him that folly and green minds look after. A 			pestilent complete knave, and the woman hath found him 		 already.","Be quiet and listen to me. Remember how she fell madly in love 			with the Moor because he bragged and told her made-up stories? Did 			you expect her to keep on loving him for his chattering? 			You’re too smart to think that. No, she needs someone 			nice-looking. Othello’s ugly, what pleasure could she 			find in him? Lovemaking gets boring after a while. To keep things 			hot, she’ll need to see someone with a handsome face, 			someone close to her in age, someone who looks and acts like her. 			Othello isn’t any of those things. Since he 			doesn’t have these advantages to make him attractive to 			her, she’ll get sick of him until he makes her want to 			puke. She’ll start looking around for a second choice. 			Now, if that’s true—and it’s 			obviously true—who’s in a better position than 			Cassio? He’s a smooth talker, and uses sophistication and 			fine manners to hide his lust. Nobody’s as crafty as he 			is. Besides, he’s young and handsome, and he’s 			got all the qualities that naïve and silly girls go for. 			He’s a bad boy, and Desdemona’s got her eye on 			him already."
I cannot believe that in her. She’s full of most 			blessed condition.,I can’t believe that. She’s not that kind of 			woman. She’s very moral.
"Blessed fig’s-end! The wine she drinks is made of 			grapes. If she had been blessed, she would never have loved the 			Moor. Blessed pudding! Didst thou not see her paddle with the palm 			of his hand? Didst not mark that?","Like hell she is! She’s made of the same flesh and 			blood as everyone else. If she were so moral, she would never have 			fallen in love with the Moor in the first place. Good lord! Did you 			notice how she and Cassio were fondling each other’s 			hands? Did you see that?"
"Yes, that I did, but that was but courtesy.","Yes, I did. But that wasn’t romantic, it was just 			polite manners."
"Lechery, by this hand, an index and obscure prologue to the 			history of lust and foul thoughts. They met so near with their lips 			that their breaths embraced together. Villainous thoughts, Roderigo! 			When these mutabilities so marshal the way, hard at hand comes the 			master and main exercise, th' incorporate conclusion. 			Pish! But, sir, be you ruled by me. I have brought you from Venice. 			Watch you tonight for the command, I’ll lay ’t 			upon you. Cassio knows you not. I’ll not be far from you. 			Do you find some occasion to anger Cassio, either by speaking too 			loud, or tainting his discipline, or from what other course you 			please, which the time shall more favorably minister.","They were lusting after each other. You could tell by how they 			were acting that they’re going to be lovers. They were so 			close that their breath was mingling. When two people get that 			intimate, sex will soon follow. Disgusting! But listen to me; let me 			guide you. I brought you here from Venice. Be on guard duty tonight. 			I’ll put you in charge. Cassio doesn’t know 			you. I’ll be nearby. Make Cassio angry somehow, either by 			speaking too loud, or insulting his military skills, or however else 			you want."
Well.,All right.
"Sir, he’s rash and very sudden in choler, and haply may 			strike at you. Provoke him that he may. For even out of that will I 			cause these of Cyprus to mutiny, whose qualification shall come into 			no true taste again but by the displanting of Cassio. So shall you 			have a shorter journey to your desires by the means I shall then 			have to prefer them, and the impediment most profitably removed, 			without the which there were no expectation of our 		 prosperity.","He’s hot-tempered, and he might try to hit you with his 			staff. Try to get him to do that. That’ll allow me to 			stir up public sentiment against him here in Cyprus. I’ll 			get them so riled up that they’ll only calm down when 			Cassio’s fired. To get what you want, you need to get 			Cassio out of the way. If you don’t do that, things are 			hopeless for you."
"I will do this, if you can bring it to any opportunity.","I’ll do it, if you help me out."
I warrant thee. Meet me by and by at the citadel. I must fetch his 			necessaries ashore. Farewell.,I promise I will. Meet me in a little while at the citadel. I need 			to get Othello’s things from the ship. Goodbye.
Adieu.,Goodbye.
"That Cassio loves her, I do well believe ’t. That she loves him, ’tis apt and of great credit. The Moor, howbeit that I endure him not, Is of a constant, loving, noble nature, A most dear husband. Now, I do love her too, Not out of absolute lust—though peradventure I stand accountant for as great a sin— But partly led to diet my revenge, Hath leaped into my seat. The thought whereof Doth, like a poisonous mineral, gnaw my inwards, And nothing can or shall content my soul Till I am evened with him, wife for wife. At least into a jealousy so strong That judgment cannot cure. Which thing to do, If this poor trash of Venice, whom I trace For his quick hunting, stand the putting on, Abuse him to the Moor in the right garb (For I fear Cassio with my night-cape too) Make the Moor thank me, love me, and reward me For making him egregiously an ass Even to madness. 'Tis here, but yet confused. Knavery’s plain face is never seen till used.","I think Cassio really does love her, and it’s perfectly 			likely that she loves him too. I can’t stand the Moor, 			but I have to admit that he’s a reliable, loving, and 			good-natured man. He’d probably be a good husband to 			Desdemona. I love her too, not simply out of lust, but also to feed 			my revenge. I have a feeling the Moor slept with my wife. That 			thought keeps gnawing at me, eating me up inside. I won’t 			be satisfied until I get even with him, wife for wife. If I 			can’t do that, I can at least make the Moor so jealous 			that he can’t think straight. If that piece of Venetian 			trash Roderigo can do what I need to carry out my plan, 			I’ll have power over Cassio. I’ll say bad 			things about him to the Moor. I have a feeling Cassio seduced my 			wife as well. I’ll make the Moor thank me, love me, and 			reward me, even though the joke will be on him the whole time. 			I’ve got a good plan, though I haven’t worked 			out the details yet. You can never see the end of an evil plan until 			the moment comes."
"It is Othello’s pleasure, our noble and valiant 			general, that, upon certain tidings now arrived, importing the mere 			perdition of the Turkish fleet, every man put himself into triumph: 			some to dance, some to make bonfires, each man to what sport and 			revels his addiction leads him. For besides these beneficial news, 			it is the celebration of his nuptial. So much was his pleasure 			should be proclaimed. All offices are open, and there is full 			liberty of feasting from this present hour of five till the bell 			have told eleven. Bless the isle of Cyprus and our noble general 			Othello!","Our noble and courageous general Othello having been informed that 			the Turkish fleet has been completely destroyed, invites every man 			to celebrate our victory. Some of you dance, some of you make 			bonfires, and every man celebrate in whatever way he likes to. For 			besides the good news, we are also celebrating his marriage. 			That’s the end of the announcement. There will be a feast 			from five o'clock until eleven. God bless the island of 			Cyprus and our noble general Othello!"
"Good Michael, look you to the guard tonight. Let’s teach ourselves that honorable stop Not to outsport discretion.","Good Michael, keep a careful eye on the guards tonight. 			Let’s exercise restraint and not let the party get too 			wild."
"Iago hath direction what to do, Will I look to ’t.",Iago has orders what to do. But I’ll see to it 			personally anyway.
"Iago is most 			honest. Michael, good night. Tomorrow with your earliest Let me have speech with you.— Come, my dear love, That profit’s yet to come ’tween me and you. Good night.","Iago’s a good man. Goodnight, Michael. Come talk to me 			tomorrow as early as you can.—Come with me, my dear love. 			Now that the wedding’s over, we can have the pleasure of 			consummating our marriage. Good night, everyone."
"Welcome, Iago. We must to the watch.","Hello, Iago. It’s time for us to stand guard."
"Not this hour, lieutenant, ’tis not yet ten 			o' the clock. Our general cast us thus early for the love 			of his Desdemona—who let us not therefore blame. He hath 			not yet made wanton the night with her, and she is sport for 		 Jove.","Not yet, lieutenant. It’s not even ten 			o'clock. The general got rid of us early tonight so he 			could be with Desdemona.—I can’t blame him. He 			hasn’t spent the night with her yet, and she’s 			beautiful enough to be Jove’s Jove is the head of the gods in Roman mythology. Jove’s lover."
She’s a most exquisite lady.,She’s an exquisitely beautiful lady.
"And, I’ll warrant her, full of game.",And I bet she’s good in bed too.
Indeed she’s a most fresh and delicate creature.,"Yes, she’s young and tender."
What an eye she has! Methinks it sounds a parley to 		 provocation.,And such pretty eyes! Like an invitation.
"An inviting eye, and yet methinks right modest.","Yes, she’s pretty. But she’s modest and 			ladylike too."
"And when she speaks, is it not an alarum to love?","And when she speaks, doesn’t her voice stir up 		 passion?"
She is indeed perfection.,"She’s a perfect woman, it’s true."
"Well, happiness to their sheets! Come, lieutenant, I have a stoup 			of wine, and here without are a brace of Cyprus gallants that would 			fain have a measure to the health of black Othello.","Well, good luck to them tonight in bed! Come with us, lieutenant. 			I’ve got a jug of wine, and these two Cyprus gentlemen 			want to drink a toast to the black Othello."
"Not tonight, good Iago. I have very poor and unhappy brains for 			drinking. I could well wish courtesy would invent some other custom 			of entertainment.","Not tonight, Iago. I’m not much of a drinker. I wish 			there was less social pressure to drink."
"Oh, they are our friends. But one cup. I’ll drink for 			you.","Oh, but these are our friends. Just one glass. I’ll do 			most of the drinking for you."
"I have drunk but one cup tonight, and that was craftily qualified 			too, and behold what innovation it makes here. I am unfortunate in 			the infirmity, and dare not task my weakness with any more.","I’ve already had a glass of wine tonight, watered down, 			but look how drunk I am. I’m not a heavy drinker. I 			wouldn’t dare drink much more than that."
"What, man, ’tis a night of revels! The gallants desire 			it.","What are you talking about, man? Tonight is for celebrating! The 			gentlemen are waiting."
Where are they?,Where are they?
Here at the door. I pray you call them in.,By the door. Please invite them in.
"I’ll do ’t, but it dislikes me.","I’ll do it, but I don’t like it."
"With that which he hath drunk tonight already, He’ll be as full of quarrel and offense As my young mistress' dog. Now my sick fool Roderigo, Whom love hath turned almost the wrong side out, Potations pottle-deep, and he’s to watch. Three lads of Cyprus, noble swelling spirits (That hold their honors in a wary distance, The very elements of this warlike isle) And they watch too. Now ’mongst this flock of drunkards Am I to put our Cassio in some action That may offend the isle. But here they 			come. If consequence do but approve my dream","If I can just get him to drink one more glass after what 			he’s drunk already, he’ll be as argumentative 			and eager to fight as a little dog. That fool Roderigo, all twisted 			up inside with love, has been drinking toasts to Desdemona by the 			gallon, and he’s on guard duty.I’ve gotten the 			rest of the guards drunk, as well as several gentlemen from Cyprus 			who are quick to take offense. Now I’ll get Cassio to do 			something in front of all these drunkards that will offend everyone 			on the island. Here they come. If the future turns out as I hope it 			will, I’m all set for success."
"'Fore heaven, they have given me a rouse 		 already.","My God, they’ve given me a lot to drink."
"Good faith, a little one, not past a pint, As I am a 		 soldier.","No, it was a little one, not more than a pint."
"Some wine, ho! (sings) And let me the 			 cannikin clink, clink, A 			 soldier’s a man, A life’s 			 but a span, Why then let a 			 soldier drink. Some wine, 			boys!","Bring in more wine! (he sings) And clink your 			 glasses together, And clink your 			 glasses together. A 			 soldier’s a man, And a 			 man’s life is short, So let the soldier 			 drink. Have some more 			 wine, boys!"
"Fore heaven, an excellent song.","My God, what a great song!"
"I learned it in England where indeed they are most potent in 			potting. Your Dane, your German, and your swag-bellied 			Hollander—Drink, ho!—are nothing to your 			English.","I learned it in England, where they have a talent for drinking. The 			Danes, the Germans, and the Dutch—come on, drink, 			drink!—are nothing compared to the English."
Is your Englishman so expert in his drinking?,Are Englishmen really such heavy drinkers?
"Why, he drinks you with facility your Dane dead drunk; he sweats 			not to overthrow your Almain. He gives your Hollander a vomit ere 			the next pottle can be filled.","They drink Danes under the table, and it takes them no effort at 			all to out-drink Germans. And the Dutch are vomiting while the 			English are asking for refills."
To the health of our general!,Let’s drink to our general!
"I am for it, lieutenant, and I’ll do you 		 justice.","Hear, hear! I’ll drink as much as you do!"
"Oh, sweet England! (sings) King Stephen was a worthy 			peer, His breeches cost him but a 			 crown, With that he called the tailor 			 lown. He was a wight of high 			renown, And thou art but of low 			degree, 'Tis pride that 			 pulls the country down, Some wine, ho!","Oh, sweet England! (he sings) King Stephen was a good king, 			 and his pants were very cheap, But he thought his tailor 			 overcharged him, so he called him a peasant. And that was a man of noble 			 rank, much higher than you are. So be happy with your worn-out 			 cloak, Since pride is ruining the 			 nation. More wine!"
"Why, this is a more exquisite song than the other.","God, that song’s even better than the other one."
Will you hear ’t again?,Do you want to hear it again?
"No, for I hold him to be unworthy of his place that does those 			things. Well, heaven’s above all, and there be souls must 			be saved, and there be souls must not be saved.","No, because we shouldn’t be doing 			that—stuff. Oh well, God’s in charge, and some 			people have to go to heaven, while other people have to go to 		 hell."
"It’s true, good lieutenant.","That’s true, lieutenant."
"For mine own part, no offence to the general nor any man of 			quality, I hope to be saved.",Speaking for myself—and no offense to the general or 			anyone else—I hope I’m going to heaven.
"And so do I too, lieutenant.","Me too, lieutenant."
"Ay, but (by your leave) not before me. The lieutenant is to be 			saved before the ancient. Let’s have no more of this, 			let’s to our affairs.—Forgive us our 			sins!—Gentlemen, let’s look to our business. 			Do not think, gentlemen, I am drunk. This is my ancient, this is my 			right hand, and this is my left. I am not drunk now. I can stand 			well enough, and I speak well enough.","Okay, but please not before me. The lieutenant has to get to 			heaven before the ensign. But let’s stop this drinking 			and get down to business.—God forgive our 			sins!—Gentlemen, let’s get down to business. 			By the way, I don’t want anyone thinking I’m 			drunk. This is my ensign. This is my right hand, and this is my left 			hand. I’m not drunk. I can stand well enough, and I can speak 			just fine."
Excellent well!,"Yes, you’re speaking very well."
"Why, very well then. You must not think then that I am 		 drunk.","Yes, very well. So don’t think that I’m 			drunk."
"To th' platform, masters. Come, let’s set 			the watch.",Let’s go to the platform where we’ll stand 			guard. Come on.
"You see this fellow that is gone before, He is a soldier fit to stand by Caesar And give direction. And do but see his vice, The one as long as th' other. 'Tis pity of 			him. I fear the trust Othello puts him in On some odd time of his infirmity Will shake this island.","You see that man who just left? He’s a good soldier, 			good enough to be Caesar’s right-hand man. But he has a 			serious weakness. It’s too bad. I’m worried 			that Othello trusts him too much, and it’ll be bad for 			Cyprus eventually."
But is he often 			thus?,But is he often like this?
He’ll watch the horologe a double set If drink rock not his cradle.,He drinks like this every night before he goes to sleep. 			He’d stay up all night and all day if he 			didn’t drink himself to sleep.
"It were well The general were put in mind of it. Perhaps he sees it not, or his good nature And looks not on his evils. Is not this true?","The general should be informed about this. Maybe he’s 			never noticed, or he only wants to see Cassio’s good 			side. Don’t you think so?"
"(aside) How now, Roderigo? I pray you, after the lieutenant, go!","(speaking so that only RODERIGO 			 can hear) Hello, Roderigo. 			Please, follow the lieutenant. Hurry! Go!"
And ’tis great pity that the noble Moor With one of an ingraft infirmity. It were an honest action to say So to the Moor.,And it’s too bad that the Moor chose a man with such a 			deep-rooted drinking problem as his second-in-command. We should 			definitely say something to the Moor.
"Not I, for this 			fair island. I do love Cassio well, and would do much","I wouldn’t say anything, not if you gave me the whole 			island for doing so. I respect Cassio and I’d like to 			help cure his alcoholism—"
"But, hark! What noise?",What’s that noise?
Zounds! You rogue! You rascal!,"Damn you, you villain, you rascal!"
"What’s the matter, lieutenant?","What’s the matter, lieutenant?"
A knave teach me my duty?,To think that fool had the nerve to try to teach me manners! 			I’ll beat him until the welts look like 		 basket-weave!
Beat me?,You’ll beat me?
"Dost thou prate, rogue? (strikes 			him)","Are you talking, you villain?(he 			hits RODERIGO)"
"Nay, good lieutenant! I pray you, sir, hold your hand. (stays him)","No, don’t hit him, lieutenant! Please, sir, restrain 			yourself. (he restrains CASSIO)"
"Let me go, sir, or I’ll knock you o'er the 			mazzard.","Let me go, or I’ll knock you on the head."
"Come, come, you’re drunk.","Come on, you’re drunk."
Drunk?,Drunk?
"(aside to RODERIGO) Away, I say, go out, and cry a mutiny.—",(speaking so that only RODERIGO 			 can hear) Go tell everyone 			there’s a riot.—
"Nay, good lieutenant! Alas, gentlemen— Help, masters!—Here’s a goodly watch 		 indeed!","No, lieutenant—God, 			gentlemen—Help—Lieutenant—sir, 			Montano—Help, men!—The night guard is 		 coming!"
"Who’s that which rings the bell?—Diablo, ho! The town will rise. Fie, Fie, lieutenant, You’ll be ashamed for ever.","Who’s sounding that alarm? The whole town will riot! 			God, lieutenant, please stop! You’ll be ashamed of this 			forever!"
What is the matter here?,What is the matter here?
"I bleed still, I am hurt to the death. He dies!","My God, I’m bleeding! I’ve been mortally 			wounded. I’ll kill him!"
"Hold, for your lives!",Stop right now!
"Hold, ho! Lieutenant—sir, Montano—gentlemen, Hold! The general speaks to you. Hold, for shame!","Stop! Lieutenant—sir, Montano—gentlemen! 			Have you forgotten your duty and your sense of decorum? Stop! The 			general is talking to you! Stop, for God’s sake!"
"Why, how now, ho! From whence ariseth this? Are we turned Turks? And to ourselves do that Which heaven hath forbid the Ottomites? He that stirs next to carve for his own rage Holds his soul light, he dies upon his motion. Silence that dreadful bell, it frights the isle From her propriety. What is the matter, masters?— Speak, who began this? On thy love, I charge thee.","How did this all start? Have we all become as savage as the Turks, 			treating each other as badly as they would have treated us? For 			heaven’s sake, stop this savage brawl! The next man who 			swings his sword must not care about his life, because the instant 			he strikes, he dies. Stop that alarm from ringing, it’s 			scaring the islanders. What’s the matter here, 			gentlemen?—Honest Iago, you look upset. Speak up and tell 			me who started this. Answer me."
"I do not know. Friends all but now, even now, In quarter, and in terms like bride and groom Divesting them for bed. And then, but now,",I don’t know. We were all having fun until just a 			minute ago; we were as happy as a bride and groom taking off their 			clothes. But then the mood suddenly changed. It was as if something 			had driven the men insane and made them point their swords at one 			another. I don’t
"Swords out, and tilting one at other’s breasts In opposition bloody. I cannot speak Any beginning to this peevish odds, And would in action glorious I had lost",know what could have started this. I’d rather have lost 			my legs in battle than be a part of this!
"How comes it, Michael, you are thus forgot?","How did you manage to lose your self-control like this, 		 Michael?"
"I pray you pardon me, I cannot speak.","Please, excuse me, sir. I can’t speak."
"Worthy Montano, you were wont be civil. The gravity and stillness of your youth In mouths of wisest censure. What’s the matter That you unlace your reputation thus And spend your rich opinion for the name Of a night-brawler? Give me answer to it.","Montano, you’re supposed to be calm and collected. 			You’re famous for it. Wise people respect you. What in 			the world made you risk your reputation like this and become a 			street brawler? Tell me."
"Your officer Iago can inform you, While I spare speech, which something now offends me, Of all that I do know. Nor know I aught By me that’s said or done amiss this night, And to defend ourselves it be a sin When violence assails us.","Othello, I’ve been seriously hurt. Your officer Iago 			can tell you what happened. I should save my breath, since it hurts 			to talk. I didn’t do anything wrong that I know of, 			unless it was a sin to defend myself when someone attacked 		 me."
"Now, by heaven, My blood begins my safer guides to rule, And passion, having my best judgment collied,","All right, now I’m starting to lose my cool. By God, if 			you don’t tell me what happened you’ll all 			suffer. Tell me how this fight began, who started it. Whoever is 			guilty, even if he were my twin brother, I swear I’m 			through with him. We’re in a town that’s 		 just"
"Or do but lift this arm, the best of you Shall sink in my rebuke. Give me to know How this foul rout began, who set it on, And he that is approved in this offence, Shall lose me. What, in a town of war Yet wild, the people’s hearts brimful of fear, To manage private and domestic quarrel? In night, and on the court and guard of safety?","avoided a war, everyone’s still on edge, and 			you’re getting into private fights while 			you’re supposed to be on guard duty? That’s 			unbelievably bad. Iago, who started it?"
If partially affined or leagued in office Thou dost deliver more or less than truth Thou art no soldier.,"I know you’re close to Cassio, but if you diverge from 			the truth in any way, you’re not a true soldier."
"Touch me not so 			near. I had rather have this tongue cut from my mouth Yet I persuade myself to speak the truth Shall nothing wrong him. This it is, general: Montano and myself being in speech, There comes a fellow crying out for help To execute upon him. Sir, this gentleman Steps in to Cassio and entreats his pause, Myself the crying fellow did pursue, Lest by his clamor—as it so fell out— Outran my purpose, and I returned then rather For that I heard the clink and fall of swords And Cassio high in oath, which till tonight I ne'er might say before. When I came back— At blow and thrust, even as again they were When you yourself did part them. More of this matter cannot I report.","You’re hitting close to home there. I’d 			rather cut my tongue out of my mouth than say anything bad about 			Michael Cassio. But I don’t think it’ll hurt 			him to tell the truth. This is what happened, General. Montano and I 			were talking when a man came running, crying for help. Cassio was 			chasing him with his sword out, trying to kill the guy. This 			gentleman stopped Cassio and told him to put away his sword. I 			followed the guy who was crying for help, to keep him from scaring 			the public. But he was fast and outran me. When I got back, I heard 			the swords clinking and Cassio swearing. I’d never heard 			him swear before. They were nearly killing each other, as you saw 			when you pulled them apart. I can’t tell you anything 			else."
"But men are men, the best sometimes forget. As men in rage strike those that wish them best, Yet surely Cassio, I believe, received From him that fled some strange indignity Which patience could not pass.","But nobody’s perfect, and even the best man sometimes 			loses control and strikes out in rage. Cassio was wrong to hurt 			Montano, who was only trying to help him, but I’m sure 			the guy who ran away must have offended Cassio in some terrible way, 			and Cassio couldn’t let it pass."
"I know, Iago, Making it light to Cassio. Cassio, I love thee But never more be officer of mine.—","Iago, I know you’re fond of Cassio and are downplaying 			this for his benefit. Cassio, I love you, but you’re 			never again going to be one of my officers.—"
"Look, if my gentle love be not raised up! I’ll make thee an example.","Look, you’ve woken my wife! I’ll make you an 			example for the others to learn from."
"What’s the matter, dear?","What’s the matter, dear?"
"All’s well, sweeting, Come away to bed.—(to 			 MONTANO) Sir, for your hurts Myself will be your surgeon. Lead him off.","Everything’s fine, now, sweetheart. Go back to 			bed.— (to MONTANO) I’ll see to it personally 			that your wounds are treated. Lead him off."
"Iago, look with care about the town Come, Desdemona, ’tis the soldiers' life To have their balmy slumbers waked with strife.","Iago, go and calm down the townspeople.—Come with me, 			Desdemona. Unfortunately, it’s part of the 			soldier’s life to be woken up by trouble."
"What, are you hurt, lieutenant?","Are you hurt, lieutenant?"
"Ay, past all surgery.","Yes, but no doctor can help me."
"Marry, heaven forbid!",Oh I hope that’s not true!
"Reputation, reputation, reputation! Oh, I have lost my reputation! 			I have lost the immortal part of myself, and what remains is 			bestial. My reputation, Iago, my reputation!","My reputation, my reputation! I’ve lost my reputation, 			the longest-living and truest part of myself! Everything else in me 			is just animal-like. Oh, my reputation, Iago, my reputation!"
"As I am an honest man, I thought you had received some bodily 			wound. There is more sense in that than in reputation. Reputation is 			an idle and most false imposition, oft got without merit and lost 			without deserving. You have lost no reputation at all unless you 			repute yourself such a loser. What, man, there are ways to recover 			the general again. You are but now cast in his mood, a punishment 			more in policy than in malice, even so as one would beat his 			offenseless dog to affright an imperious lion. Sue to him again and 			he’s yours.","I swear I thought you meant you’d been hurt physically. 			Your physical health matters more than your reputation. A reputation 			is a useless and fake quality that others impose on us. You 			haven’t lost it unless you think you have. There are lots 			of ways to get on the general’s good side again. 			You’ve been discharged because he’s angry, and 			because he’s obliged to do so for policy reasons, not 			because he dislikes you. He’s got to beat up the weak to 			frighten the strong. Go to him, petition him. He’ll 			change his mind."
"I will rather sue to be despised than to deceive so good a 			commander with so slight, so drunken, and so indiscreet an officer. 			Drunk? And speak parrot? And squabble? Swagger? Swear? And discourse 			fustian with one’s own shadow? O thou invisible spirit of 			wine, if thou hast no name to be known by, let us call thee 		 devil!","I’d rather ask him to hate me than ask such a good 			commander to accept such a worthless, drunk, stupid officer as 			myself. Drunk? Babbling senselessly? Squabbling? Swaggering? 			Swearing? Ranting and raving to my own shadow! Oh, wine is the 			devil!"
What was he that you followed with your sword? What had he done to 			you?,Who were you chasing with your sword? What did he do to 		 you?
I know not.,I don’t know.
Is ’t possible?,Is that possible?
"I remember a mass of things, but nothing distinctly. A quarrel, 			but nothing wherefore. Oh, that men should put an enemy in their 			mouths to steal away their brains! That we should, with joy, 			pleasance revel and applause, transform ourselves into 		 beasts!","I remember a jumble of impressions, but nothing distinctly. I 			remember a fight, but not why we were fighting. Oh God, why do men 			drink and lose their minds? Why do we party until we’re 			like animals?"
"Why, but you are now well enough. How came you thus 		 recovered?",You seem all right now. How did you get better?
"It hath pleased the devil drunkenness to give place to the devil 			wrath. One unperfectness shows me another, to make me frankly 			despise myself.","My drunkenness went away when anger took over. One weakness led to 			another, to make me hate myself."
"Come, you are too severe a moraler. As the time, the place, and 			the condition of this country stands, I could heartily wish this had 			not befallen. But since it is as it is, mend it for your own 		 good.","Come on, you’re being too hard on yourself. I wish none 			of this had happened, given the situation here, and your rank. But 			since this has happened, you should fix it for your own good."
"I will ask him for my place again, he shall tell me I am a 			drunkard. Had I as many mouths as Hydra, such an answer would stop 			them all. To be now a sensible man, by and by a fool, and presently 			a beast! Oh, strange! Every inordinate cup is unblessed and the 			ingredient is a devil.","I’ll ask him for my position back again, and 			he’ll tell me I’m a drunk. Even if I had a 			whole bunch of mouths, I wouldn’t be able to answer that. 			I was a reasonable man, then I became a fool, and finally a beast! 			Oh, how strange! Every glass of liquor is damned, and the 			devil’s the main ingredient!"
"Come, come, good wine is a good familiar creature, if it be well 			used. Exclaim no more against it. And, good lieutenant, I think you 			think I love you.","Come on now, wine is good for you, if you know how to use it. 			Don’t say anything bad about wine anymore. Lieutenant, I 			think you know I’m your friend."
"I have well approved it, sir. I drunk!","I know that, sir. Imagine, me, a drunk!"
"You or any man living may be drunk at a time, man. I tell you what 			you shall do. Our general’s wife is now the general. I 			may say so in this respect, for that he hath devoted and given up 			himself to the contemplation, mark, and denotement of her parts and 			graces. Confess yourself freely to her, importune her help to put 			you in your place again. She is of so free, so kind, so apt, so 			blessed a disposition, she holds it a vice in her goodness not to do 			more than she is requested. This broken joint between you and her 			husband entreat her to splinter, and, my fortunes against any lay 			worth naming, this crack of your love shall grow stronger than it 			was before.","Any man can get drunk sometime. I’ll tell you what to 			do. Othello’s wife has a lot of influence now. 			He’s completely devoted to her. Go open your heart to 			her. Ask her to help you get back your position. She is so generous, 			kind, and ready to help that she thinks it’s wrong not to 			do everything she can, even more than she is asked to do. Ask her to 			help you heal the rift between her husband and you. I’d 			bet my lucky stars your problem will be forgotten, and your 			relationship will be stronger than ever."
You advise me well.,That’s good advice.
"I protest, in the sincerity of love and honest kindness.",I’m helping you because I like and respect you.
"I think it freely, and betimes in the morning I will beseech the 			virtuous Desdemona to undertake for me. I am desperate of my 			fortunes if they check me.",I believe it completely. Early in the morning I’ll go 			visit Desdemona and plead my case. My situation is desperate.
"You are in the right. Good night, lieutenant, I must to the 		 watch.","You’re doing the right thing. Good night, lieutenant. 			I’ve got to go to the guard tower."
"Good night, honest Iago.","Good night, honest Iago."
"When this advice is free I give and honest, Probal to thinking and indeed the course To win the Moor again? For ’tis most easy Th' inclining Desdemona to subdue As the free elements. And then for her To win the Moor, were to renounce his baptism, All seals and symbols of redeemèd sin, His soul is so enfettered to her love, Even as her appetite shall play the god With his weak function. How am I then a villain To counsel Cassio to this parallel course, Directly to his good? Divinity of hell! They do suggest at first with heavenly shows As I do now. For whiles this honest fool Plies Desdemona to repair his fortune And she for him pleads strongly to the Moor,","Who can say I’m evil when my advice is so good? 			That’s really the best way to win the Moor back again. 			It’s easy to get Desdemona on your side. She’s 			full of good intentions. And the Moor loves her so much he would 			renounce his Christianity to keep her happy. He’s so 			enslaved by love that she can make him do whatever she wants. How am 			I evil to advise Cassio to do exactly what’ll do him 			good? That’s the kind of argument you’d expect 			from Satan! When devils are about to commit their biggest sins they 			put on their most heavenly faces, just like I’m doing 			now. And while this fool is begging Desdemona to help him, and while 			she’s pleading his case to the Moor, I’ll 			poison the Moor’s ear against her, hinting that 			she’s taking Cassio’s side because of her lust 			for him. The more she"
That she repeals him for her body’s lust. And by how much she strives to do him good She shall undo her credit with the Moor. So will I turn her virtue into pitch That shall enmesh them all.,"tries to help Cassio, the more she’ll shake 			Othello’s confidence in her. And that’s how 			I’ll turn her good intentions into a big trap to snag 			them all."
"How now, 		 Roderigo!","Hello, Roderigo!"
"I do follow here in the chase not like a hound that hunts, but one 			that fills up the cry. My money is almost spent, I have been tonight 			exceedingly well cudgeled, and I think the issue will be I shall 			have so much experience for my pains. And so, with no money at all 			and a little more wit, return again to Venice.","I’m totally worn out. My chase is too much for me. 			I’ve spent most of my money, and tonight I got beaten up. 			The upshot is that I’ve got a little more experience. So 			with no money, but a little more wisdom, I’m going back 			to Venice."
"How poor are they that have not patience! What wound did ever heal but by degrees? And wit depends on dilatory time. Does’t not go well? Cassio hath beaten thee. And thou, by that small hurt, hath cashiered Cassio. Though other things grow fair against the sun, Content thyself awhile. In troth, ’tis morning. Pleasure and action make the hours seem short. Retire thee, go where thou art billeted. Away, I say, thou shalt know more hereafter.","You’re a poor man if you’re this impatient! 			If you get hurt, does your wound heal immediately? No, it heals 			gradually. We achieve things with our intelligence, not by magic, 			and intelligent planning takes time. Aren’t things going 			well? Cassio’s beaten you up, but with that tiny 			sacrifice on your part, you got Cassio discharged! If 			we’re patient, we’ll be rewarded with the 			fruits of our labors. My God, it’s morning. All this 			excitement has made the time fly by. Go back to where 			you’re staying and go to sleep. Go on, I’m 			telling you. You’ll understand better later. Go."
"Two things are to 			be done: My wife must move for Cassio to her mistress. I’ll set her on. Myself, the while, to draw the Moor apart And bring him jump when he may Cassio find Dull not device by coldness and delay.","Now two things still need to be done. My wife has to help make 			Desdemona take Cassio’s side. I’ll put her on 			that. And I need to take the Moor aside right at the moment when 			Cassio’s talking to Desdemona, so he’ll see 			them together. Yes, that’s the way I’ll do it. 			Let’s not ruin a brilliant plan by being slow to 		 act."
"Masters, play here, I will content your pains. Something that’s brief, and bid “Good 			morrow, general.”","Musicians, start playing here. I’ll pay you for your 			trouble. Play something short that will put the general in a good 			mood."
"Why masters, have your instruments been in Naples, that they speak 			i' th' nose thus?","Your instruments all have a nasal twang. Have they been to Naples Naples was considered a likely place to contract syphilis, which eats away at the bridge of the nose. Naples ?"
"How, sir? How?",Excuse me?
"Are these, I pray you, wind instruments?",Are these wind instruments?
"Ay, marry, are they, sir.","Yes, they are."
"Oh, thereby hangs a tail.","Oh, there’s the problem."
"Whereby hangs a tale, sir?",What’s the problem?
"Marry sir, by many a wind instrument that I know. But, masters, 			here’s money for you, and the general so likes your music 			that he desires you, for love’s sake, to make no more 			noise with it.","Anyone full of hot air is a problem. But here’s some 			money. The general likes your music a lot, but he asks you to stop 			playing now."
"Well, sir, we will not.","Well, we’ll stop, then."
"If you have any music that may not be heard, to ’t 			again. But, as they say, to hear music the general does not greatly 			care.","If you’ve got any music that can’t be heard, 			then play that. But as I said, the general isn’t really 			in the mood to hear music now."
"We have none such, sir.",We don’t have any music that can’t be 		 heard.
"Then put up your pipes in your bag, for I’ll away. Go, 			vanish into air, away!",Then pack up your instruments and go away. Go!
"Dost thou hear, my honest friend?","Do you hear, my friend?"
"No, I hear not your honest friend, I hear you.","No, I don’t hear your friend. I hear you."
"Prithee, keep up thy quillets. There’s a poor piece of 			gold for thee. If the gentlewoman that attends the 			general’s wife be stirring, tell her there’s 			one Cassio entreats her a little favour of speech. Wilt thou do 			this?","Please don’t play games. (CASSIO gives CLOWN money). 			There’s a bit of gold for you. When the woman taking care 			of the general’s wife wakes up, could you please tell her 			that Cassio asks to speak with her?"
"She is stirring, sir. If she will stir hither, I shall seem to 			notify unto her.","She’s awake, sir. If she feels like coming over here, 			I’ll give her your message."
"In happy time, 			Iago.","Good to see you, Iago."
"You have not been abed, then?","You didn’t go to sleep, then?"
"Why, no. The day 			had broke Before we parted. I have made bold, Iago, Is that she will to virtuous Desdemona Procure me some access.","No. When I left you it was already morning. I’ve been 			bold, Iago. I’ve asked to talk to your wife. 			I’m going to ask her to let me talk to Desdemona."
"I’ll send her to you presently, And I’ll devise a mean to draw the Moor May be more free.","I’ll send her out to you now. I’ll think of a plan to get the Moor out of the way, so you can speak more openly."
I humbly thank you for’t.,I humbly thank you.
I never knew a Florentine more kind and honest.,"Even for a Florentine The citizens of Florence (who included Machiavelli) were not known for kindness and honesty, but Michael Cassio seems unaware of Florence’s bad reputation. Florentine , I never knew someone so kind and honest."
"Good morrow, good Lieutenant. I am sorry The general and his wife are talking of it, And she speaks for you stoutly. The Moor replies That he you hurt is of great fame in Cyprus And great affinity, and that in wholesome wisdom And needs no other suitor but his likings To take the safest occasion by the front To bring you in again.","Good morning, lieutenant. I’m sorry about what happened, but I’m sure everything will turn out all right. The general and his wife are talking about it now, and she’s defending you strongly. The Moor says the man you hurt is very important in Cyprus, and that under the circumstances he has no choice but to refuse to reinstate you. But he says he still loves and respects you, and based on his own feelings alone he’s looking for an opportunity to safely take you back."
"Yet I beseech you, If you think fit, or that it may be done, With Desdemona alone.","Please find a way to give me some time alone with Desdemona, if you think that’s all right."
Pray you come in. I will bestow you where you shall have time To speak your bosom freely.,Please come in. I’ll take you to a place where you can speak freely.
I am much bound to you.,Thank you very much.
"These letters give, Iago, to the pilot, And by him do my duties to the senate. That done, I will be walking on the works, Repair there to me.","Iago, give these letters to the ship’s captain who brought me here, and ask him to pay my respects to the Senate of Venice. Now that’s done, I’m going to walk on the fortification walls. Look for me there when you come back."
"Well, my good lord, I’ll do ’t.","I will, my lord."
"This fortification, gentlemen, shall we see ’t?","Shall we go see this fortification, men?"
We’ll wait upon your lordship.,"We’re at your service, my lord."
"Be thou assured, good Cassio, I will do All my abilities in thy behalf.","I’ll do everything I can for you, Cassio."
"Good madam, do. I warrant it grieves my husband As if the cause were his.","Please do, madam. My husband’s so upset about Cassio’s problem you’d think it was his own."
But I will have my lord and you again As friendly as you were.,"Your husband’s such a good man. Don’t worry, Cassio. I’m sure you and my husband will be as friendly as you were before."
"Bounteous madam, Whatever shall become of Michael Cassio, He’s never anything but your true servant.","My dear beautiful lady, whatever happens to Michael Cassio, he’ll always be your humble servant."
"You have known him long, and be you well assured He shall in strangeness stand no farther off Than in a polite distance.",I know that. Thank you. You’re my husband’s friend and you’ve known him a long time. I assure you the only reason he’s keeping away from you now is political.
"Ay, but, lady, That policy may either last so long, Or breed itself so out of circumstances, That, I being absent and my place supplied, My general will forget my love and service.","Yes, my lady. But those political considerations might last such a long time that the general will forget my love and service, especially if I’m gone and someone else has my job."
"Do not doubt that. Before Emilia here If I do vow a friendship, I’ll perform it To the last article. My lord shall never rest, I’ll watch him tame and talk him out of patience.","That’ll never happen. Emilia here will be my witness: I promise you that you’ll get your position back again. And if I promise to help someone, I do everything I can. My husband will never get a moment’s rest, I’ll keep him up at night talking about you until he runs out"
"His bed shall seem a school, his board a shrift, With Cassio’s suit. Therefore be merry, Cassio, For thy solicitor shall rather die Than give thy cause away.","of patience. He will think that his bed has become a conference table for discussing your problem—he won’t be able to get away from it. I’ll bring up your name at every moment. So cheer up. I’m your advocate, and I’d rather die than give up on you."
"Madam, here comes my lord.","Madam, here comes your husband."
"Madam, I’ll take my leave.","Madam, I’d better leave now."
"Why, stay and hear me speak.",Why not stay and hear me talk to him?
Unfit for mine own purposes.,"No, madam. I’m very uncomfortable, and that won’t help my case."
"Well, do your discretion.","Well, do whatever you think best."
Ha! I like not that.,Hey! I don’t like that.
What dost thou say?,What did you say?
"Nothing, my lord, or if—I know not what.","Nothing, my lord, or if I did—I don’t know what."
Was not that Cassio parted from my wife?,Wasn’t that Cassio leaving my wife?
"Cassio, my lord? No, sure, I cannot think it That he would steal away so guilty-like Seeing you coming.","Cassio, my lord? No, I don’t think so. He wouldn’t sneak away looking so guilty when he saw you coming."
I do believe ’twas he.,I really think it was him.
"How now, my lord? I have been talking with a suitor here, A man that languishes in your displeasure.","What’s this, my lord? I was talking to a petitioner here just now, someone who’s suffering from your anger."
Who is ’t you mean?,Who do you mean?
"Why, your lieutenant, Cassio. Good my lord, His present reconciliation take. For if he be not one that truly loves you, That errs in ignorance and not in cunning, I have no judgment in an honest face.","Your lieutenant, Cassio. Oh, if I’ve got any influence over you at all, please patch things up with him. In my judgment, this man truly loves you, and his mistake was innocent rather than wicked. Please call him and tell him to come back here."
Went he hence now?,Was that him just now?
"Ay, sooth, so humbled That he hath left part of his grief with me To suffer with him. Good love, call him back.","Yes. He feels so bad and humble that I feel bad along with him. My love, call him back in here."
"Not now, sweet Desdemona. Some other time.","Not now, my sweet Desdemona. Some other time."
But shall ’t be shortly?,But will it be soon?
"The sooner, sweet, for you.","Very soon, because you want it."
Shall ’t be tonight at supper?,Will it be tonight at supper?
"No, not tonight.","No, not tonight."
"Tomorrow dinner, then?",Then tomorrow at dinner?
"I shall not dine at home, I meet the captains at the citadel.",I won’t be eating dinner at home. I’ll be meeting the captains at the citadel.
"On Tuesday noon, or night, or Wednesday morn. I prithee name the time, but let it not Exceed three days. In faith, he’s penitent, And yet his trespass, in our common reason Out of her best) is not, almost, a fault T' incur a private check. When shall he come? Tell me, Othello. I wonder in my soul What you would ask me that I should deny That came a-wooing with you, and so many a time, When I have spoke of you dispraisingly, Hath ta'en your part, to have so much to do To bring him in? Trust me, I could do much—","Well then, tomorrow night, or Tuesday morning. Or Tuesday noon or at night, or Wednesday morning. Please just name a time, but don’t wait more than three days. He’s very sorry. His mistake was hardly worth punishing him for in the first place—though in wartime it is sometimes necessary to make examples out of even the best soldiers. So when should he come? Tell me, Othello. I can’t imagine you asking me for something and me telling you no or standing there muttering. Michael Cassio came with you when you were trying to win my love. Sometimes I’d criticize you to him, and he’d defend you. And now I have to make this big fuss about bringing him back? I swear, I could do so much—"
I will deny thee nothing.,"Please, no more. He can come whenever he wants. I won’t refuse you anything."
"Why, this is not a boon, 'Tis as I should entreat you wear your gloves, Or feed on nourishing dishes, or keep you warm, Or sue to you to do a peculiar profit Wherein I mean to touch your love indeed It shall be full of poise and difficult weight And fearful to be granted.","Don’t act like you’re doing me a favor! This is like if I asked you to wear your gloves when it’s cold outside, or eat nutritious food, or do something that’s good for you. If I ever have to ask you for something that will put your luck to the test, it’ll be something difficult and terrible."
"I will deny thee nothing! Whereon I do beseech thee, grant me this,","I won’t deny you anything! But in return, please, do one thing for me: leave me alone for a little while."
"Shall I deny you? No. Farewell, my lord.","Would I ever deny you anything? No. Goodbye, my husband."
"Farewell, my Desdemona. I’ll come to thee straight.","Goodbye, my Desdemona. I’ll come see you right away."
"Emilia, come.—Be as your fancies teach you. Whate'er you be, I am obedient.","Come here, Emilia.—Do whatever you feel like doing, my husband, and I’ll obey you."
But I do love thee! And when I love thee not Chaos is come again.,"What a wonderful girl! God help me, I love you! And when I stop loving you, the universe will fall back into the chaos that was there when time began."
My noble lord—,My noble lord—
"What dost thou say, Iago?","What is it, Iago?"
Know of your love?,"When you were wooing Desdemona, did Michael Cassio know about it?"
"He did, from first to last. Why dost thou ask?","Yes, he knew about it the whole time. Why do you ask?"
"But for a satisfaction of my thought,",I was just curious. No reason.
"Why of thy thought, Iago?","Why are you curious, Iago?"
I did not think he had been acquainted with her.,I didn’t realize he knew her.
"Oh, yes, and went between us very oft.","Oh, yes. He carried messages back and forth between us very often."
Indeed?,"Oh, really?"
"Indeed? Ay, indeed! Discern’st thou aught in that?","Oh, really? Yes, really. Do you see something wrong with that? Isn’t he an honest man?"
"Honest, my lord?","Honest, my lord?"
"Honest, ay, honest.","Honest, yes, honest."
"My lord, for aught I know.","As far as I know, sir."
What dost thou think?,What are you thinking?
"Think, my lord?","Thinking, my lord?"
"As if there were some monster in thy thought Too hideous to be shown. Thou dost mean something. I heard thee say even now thou lik’st not that When Cassio left my wife. What didst not like? Of my whole course of wooing, thou cried’st “Indeed?” And didst contract and purse thy brow together As if thou then hadst shut up in thy brain Some horrible conceit. If thou dost love me","“Thinking, my lord?” My God, you keep repeating everything I say as if you were thinking something too horrible to say out loud. You’re thinking something. Just a minute ago I heard you say you didn’t like it when Cassio left my wife. What didn’t you like? And when I told you he was involved the whole time I was trying to get Desdemona, you were like, “Oh, really?” And then you frowned and wrinkled up your forehead as if you were imagining something horrible. If you’re my friend, tell me what you’re thinking."
"My lord, you know I love you.","My lord, you know I’m your friend."
"I think thou dost. And for I know thou 'rt full of love and honesty And weigh’st thy words before thou giv’st them breath, For such things in a false disloyal knave Are tricks of custom, but in a man that’s just They are close dilations, working from the heart, That passion cannot rule.","I think you are. And I know you’re full of love and honesty, and you think carefully before you speak. That’s why these pauses of yours frighten me. If some fool were withholding things from me, I wouldn’t think twice about it. If some lying, cheating villain acted like that, it would just be a trick. But when an honest man acts like that, you know he’s wrestling with bad thoughts and can’t help it."
"For Michael Cassio,","As for Michael Cassio, I think it would be safe for me to swear that he’s honest."
I think so too.,I think so too.
"Men should be what they seem, Or those that be not, would they might seem none!","People should be what they appear to be. If they’re not honest, they shouldn’t look like they are!"
"Certain, men should be what they seem.","Absolutely, people should be what they appear to be."
Why then I think Cassio’s an honest man.,"In that case, I think Cassio’s an honest man."
"I prithee speak to me as to thy thinkings, As thou dost ruminate, and give thy worst of thoughts The worst of words.","No, I think there’s more to this than you’re letting on. Please tell me what you’re thinking—even your worst suspicions."
"Good my lord, pardon me, Though I am bound to every act of duty Utter my thoughts? Why, say they are vile and false, As where’s that palace whereinto foul things Sometimes intrude not? Who has that breast so pure Wherein uncleanly apprehensions With meditations lawful?","Please don’t make me do that, sir. I have to obey all your orders, but surely I’m not obligated to reveal my deepest thoughts—even slaves aren’t expected to do that. You want me to say what I’m thinking? What if my thoughts are disgusting and wrong? Even good people think horrible things sometimes. Who is so pure that they never think a bad thought?"
"Thou dost conspire against thy friend, Iago, If thou but think’st him wronged and mak’st his ear A stranger to thy thoughts.","You’re not being a good friend, Iago, if you even think your friend has been wronged and you don’t tell him about it."
"I do beseech you, As, I confess, it is my nature’s plague To spy into abuses, and oft my jealousy Shapes faults that are not, that your wisdom, From one that so imperfectly conceits, Out of his scattering and unsure observance. It were not for your quiet nor your good,","Please don’t ask me to tell you. I might be completely wrong. I have a bad tendency to be suspicious of people and to look too closely into what they’re doing. Often I imagine crimes that aren’t really there. You would be wise to ignore my weak guesses and imaginary suspicions, and don’t worry yourself about the meaningless things I’ve noticed. For me to tell you my thoughts would only destroy your peace of mind, and"
"Nor for my manhood, honesty, and wisdom To let you know my thoughts.","it wouldn’t be wise, honest, or responsible for me to tell them."
What dost thou mean?,What are you talking about?
"Is the immediate jewel of their souls. Who steals my purse steals trash. 'Tis something, nothing: 'Twas mine, ’tis his, and has been slave to thousands. But he that filches from me my good name And makes me poor indeed.","A good reputation is the most valuable thing we have—men and women alike. If you steal my money, you’re just stealing trash. It’s something, it’s nothing: it’s yours, it’s mine, and it’ll belong to thousands more. But if you steal my reputation, you’re robbing me of something that doesn’t make you richer, but makes me much poorer."
I’ll know thy thoughts.,I’m going to find out what you’re thinking.
"You cannot, if my heart were in your hand, Nor shall not, whilst ’tis in my custody.","You can’t find that out, even if you held my heart in your hand you couldn’t make me tell you. And as long my heart’s inside my body, you never will."
Ha!,What?
"It is the green-eyed monster which doth mock The meat it feeds on. That cuckold lives in bliss Who, certain of his fate, loves not his wronger, But, oh, what damnèd minutes tells he o'er","Beware of jealousy, my lord! It’s a green-eyed monster that makes fun of the victims it devours. The man who knows his wife is cheating on him is happy, because at least he isn’t friends with the man she’s sleeping with. But think of the unhappiness of a man who worships his wife, yet doubts her faithfulness. He suspects her, but still loves her."
"Oh, misery!","Oh, what misery!"
"Poor and content is rich, and rich enough, But riches fineless is as poor as winter To him that ever fears he shall be poor. From jealousy!","The person who’s poor and contented is rich enough. But infinite riches are nothing to someone who’s always afraid he’ll be poor. God, help us not be jealous!"
"Why, why is this? Think’st thou I’d make a life of jealousy, To follow still the changes of the moon With fresh suspicions? No! To be once in doubt When I shall turn the business of my soul To such exsufflicate and blowed surmises, Matching thy inference. 'Tis not to make me jealous To say my wife is fair, feeds well, loves company, Where virtue is, these are more virtuous. Nor from mine own weak merits will I draw The smallest fear or doubt of her revolt, For she had eyes and chose me. No, Iago, And on the proof there is no more but this: Away at once with love or jealousy!","Why are you telling me this? Do you think I would live a life of jealousy, tormented by new suspicions every hour? No. If there’s any doubt, there is no doubt. I might as well be a goat if I ever let myself become obsessed with the kind of suspicions you’re implying. If you say my wife is beautiful, eats well, loves good company, speaks freely, sings, plays music, and dances well, you’re not making me jealous. When a woman is virtuous, talents like these just make her better. And I’m not going to start feeling inferior. She had her eyes wide open when she chose me. No, Iago, I’ll have to see some real evidence before I start suspecting her of anything bad, and when I suspect her, I’ll look for proof, and if there’s proof, that’s when I’ll let go of my love and my jealousy."
"I am glad of this, for now I shall have reason To show the love and duty that I bear you Receive it from me. I speak not yet of proof. Look to your wife, observe her well with Cassio. Wear your eyes thus, not jealous nor secure. I would not have your free and noble nature I know our country disposition well. In Venice they do let God see the pranks They dare not show their husbands. Their best conscience Is not to leave ’t undone, but keep’t unknown.","I’m glad to hear you say that. Now I can show you my devotion and my duty with more honesty. So please listen to me. I’m not talking about proof yet. Watch your wife. Watch how she is with Cassio. Just watch—don’t be either completely suspicious or completely trustful. I wouldn’t want to see you taken advantage of because you’re such an open and trusting guy. Watch out! I know the people of Venice well. They let God see things they wouldn’t show their husbands. They don’t avoid doing things that are wrong, they just try not to get caught."
Dost thou say so?,Do you really think so?
"She did deceive her father, marrying you, And when she seemed to shake and fear your looks, She loved them most.","She lied to her father to marry you. And when she pretended to be afraid of you, she loved you the most."
And so she did.,"That’s right, she did."
"Why, go to then. She that, so young, could give out such a seeming, He thought ’twas witchcraft. But I am much to blame. I humbly do beseech you of your pardon For too much loving you.","Well, there you go. She was so young, but she deceived her father so thoroughly he thought it was witchcraft! But I’m sorry I’ve blurted all this out. I beg your pardon for loving you too much."
I am bound to thee forever.,I’m indebted to you forever.
I see this hath a little dashed your spirits.,You seem a little depressed about this.
"Not a jot, not a jot.","Not at all, not at all."
"Trust me, I fear it has. I hope you will consider what is spoke Comes from my love. But I do see you’re moved. I am to pray you not to strain my speech To grosser issues nor to larger reach","Really, I’m afraid you are. I hope you remember that I said all this because I love you. But I see you’re troubled. Please don’t take what I said more seriously than it deserves to be taken."
I will not.,I won’t.
"Should you do so, my lord, My speech should fall into such vile success Which my thoughts aimed not at. Cassio’s my worthy friend—","If you take it too seriously, it’ll have bad effects that I didn’t want it to have. Cassio’s a good friend of mine—My lord, I can see you’re upset."
"No, not much moved. I do not think but Desdemona’s honest.","No, not too upset. I’m sure Desdemona would never cheat on me."
Long live she so. And long live you to think so.,I hope she never does! And I hope you keep on thinking she wouldn’t.
"And yet how nature, erring from itself—","But still, it’s true that good things can go bad, away from their true natures—"
"Ay, there’s the point. As, to be bold with you, Of her own clime, complexion, and degree, Whereto we see in all things nature tends— Foh! One may smell in such a will most rank, Foul disproportions, thoughts unnatural. Distinctly speak of her, though I may fear Her will, recoiling to her better judgment, May fall to match you with her country forms, And happily repent.","That’s the point I’m trying to make. If I can be frank with you, she veered away from her own nature in turning down all those young men from her own country, with her skin color, with her status—everything her nature would have drawn her to—Ugh! You can almost smell the dark and ugly desires inside her, the unnatural thoughts—But—I’m sorry—I didn’t mean to refer to her specifically just now. I only worry that she might snap back to her natural taste in men one day, and compare you unfavorably to other Italians."
"Farewell, farewell. Set on thy wife to observe. Leave me, Iago.","Goodbye, goodbye. If you see anything else, let me know. Tell your wife to watch her. Leave me alone now, Iago."
"My lord, I take my leave. (going)","My lord, I’ll say goodbye now. (beginning to exit)"
"(aside) Why did I marry? This honest creature doubtless Sees and knows more, much more, than he unfolds.","(to himself) Why did I ever get married? I’m sure this good and honest man sees and knows more, much more, than he’s telling me."
"To scan this thing no farther. Leave it to time. Although ’tis fit that Cassio have his place, For sure, he fills it up with great ability, Yet, if you please to hold him off awhile, Note if your lady strain his entertainment","(returning) My lord, please don’t think about this any more. Time will tell. It’s right for Cassio to have his lieutenancy back—he’s very talented. But keep him away for a while, and you’ll see how he goes about getting it back. Notice whether your wife insists on your"
"With any strong or vehement importunity. Much will be seen in that. In the meantime, Let me be thought too busy in my fears— And hold her free, I do beseech your honor.","giving it back to him. That will tell you a lot. But in the meantime, just assume that I’m paranoid—as I’m pretty sure I am—and keep thinking she’s innocent, please."
Fear not my government.,Don’t worry about how I handle it.
I once more take my leave.,I’ll say goodbye once more.
"This fellow’s of exceeding honesty And knows all quantities, with a learnèd spirit, Though that her jesses were my dear heartstrings, I’d whistle her off and let her down the wind To prey at fortune. Haply, for I am black And have not those soft parts of conversation Into the vale of years—yet that’s not much— She’s gone, I am abused, and my relief Must be to loathe her. Oh, curse of marriage That we can call these delicate creatures ours And live upon the vapor of a dungeon Than keep a corner in the thing I love For others' uses. Yet ’tis the plague to great ones, Prerogatived are they less than the base. Even then this forkèd plague is fated to us When we do quicken. Look where she comes.","This Iago is extremely honest and good, and he knows a lot about human behavior. If it turns out that she really is running around on me, I’ll send her away, even though it’ll break my heart. Maybe because I’m black, and I don’t have nice manners like courtiers do, or because I’m getting old—but that’s not much—She’s gone, and I’ve been cheated on. I have no choice but to hate her. Oh what a curse marriage is! We think our beautiful wives belong to us, but their desires are free! I’d rather be a toad in a moldy basement than to have only a part of someone I love, sharing the rest of her with others. This is the plague of important men—our wives betray us more than those of poor men. It’s our destiny, like death. We are destined to be betrayed when we are born. Oh, here she comes."
"If she be false, heaven mocked itself. I’ll not believe ’t.","If she’s cheated on me, then heaven itself is a fake. I don’t believe it."
"How now, my dear Othello? By you invited, do attend your presence.","What’s going on, Othello, darling? The nobles of Cyprus whom you invited to dinner are waiting for you."
I am to blame.,I’m sorry.
Why do you speak so faintly? Are you not well?,Why are you whispering? Are you sick?
"I have a pain upon my forehead, here.","I have a headache In Shakespeare\’s day, cuckolds, or men whose wives cheated on them, were imagined to have horns growing from their heads. Othello is alluding to this. headache , right here in my forehead."
"Why that’s with watching, ’twill away again. Let me but bind it hard, within this hour It will be well. (pulls out a handkerchief)","That’s from lack of sleep. It’ll go away. Let me wrap up your head, and it will feel okay in less than an hour. (she pulls out a handkerchief)"
"Your napkin is too little,","No, your handkerchief’s too little. Leave my head alone."
"Come, I’ll go in with you.","Come on, I’ll escort you to dinner."
I am very sorry that you are not well.,I’m very sorry you’re not feeling well.
"(picks up the handkercheif) I am glad I have found this napkin, My wayward husband hath a hundred times",(picking up the handkerchief) I’m glad I found this handkerchief. It’s the first keepsake the Moor gave her. My stubborn husband has asked me to steal it a
"Wooed me to steal it, but she so loves the token (For he conjured her she should ever keep it) That she reserves it evermore about her And give ’t Iago. What he will do with it Heaven knows, not I. I nothing but to please his fantasy.",hundred times. But she loves it so much (since Othello told her she should always keep it with her) that she always keeps it near her to kiss it and talk to it. I’ll copy the embroidery pattern and then give it to Iago. Heaven knows what he’s going to do with it. I only try to satisfy his whims.
How now! What do you here alone?,What’s going on? What are you doing here alone?
Do not you chide. I have a thing for you.,Don’t snap at me. I’ve got something for you.
A thing for me? It is a common thing—,"You’ve got something for me? It’s a common thing “Thing” was slang for vagina. By saying that Emilia\’s “thing” is “common,” Iago implies that she lets anyone have sex with her thing —"
Ha?,What?
To have a foolish wife.,—to have a stupid wife.
"Oh, is that all? What will you give me now","Oh, is that so? And what would you give me for the handkerchief?"
What handkerchief?,What handkerchief?
"What handkerchief? Why, that the Moor first gave to Desdemona, That which so often you did bid me steal.","What handkerchief? The one the Moor gave to Desdemona, which you asked me to steal so many times."
Hast stolen it from her?,You stole it from her?
"No, but she let it drop by negligence And, to th' advantage, I being here, took ’t up. Look, here it is.","No, actually. She dropped it carelessly, and, seizing the opportunity, since I was here, I picked it up. Look, here it is."
"A good wench, give it me.","Good girl, give it to me."
"What will you do with ’t, that you have been so earnest",And what are you going to do with it? Why did you want it so much that you begged me to steal it?
"Why, what is that to you?",What’s it to you?
"If it be not for some purpose of import, Give ’t me again. Poor lady, she’ll run mad When she shall lack it.","If you don’t need it for some important reason, then give it back to me. Poor lady, she’ll go crazy when she sees it’s missing."
"Be not acknown on ’t,","Don’t admit to knowing anything about it. I need it. Now go, leave me."
"I will in Cassio’s lodging lose this napkin And let him find it. Trifles light as air Are to the jealous confirmations strong As proofs of holy writ. This may do something. Dangerous conceits are in their natures poisons Which at the first are scarce found to distaste, But with a little act upon the blood Burn like the mines of sulfur.","I’ll leave this handkerchief at Cassio’s house and let him find it.To a jealous man, a meaningless little thing like this looks like absolute proof. This handkerchief may be useful to me. The Moor’s mind has already become infected with my poisonous suggestions. Ideas can be like poisons. At first they hardly even taste bad, but once they get into your blood they start burning like hot lava."
"I did say so. Nor all the drowsy syrups of the world, Shall ever medicine thee to that sweet sleep Which thou owedst yesterday.",Here he comes. No drugs or sleeping pills will ever give you the restful sleep that you had last night.
Ha! Ha! False to me?,Argh! She’s cheating on me?
"Why, how now, general? No more of that.","Oh, general, please, no more of that!"
I swear ’tis better to be much abused Than but to know ’t a little.,Get lost! You’ve tortured me with these thoughts. It is better to be tricked completely than to only suspect a little.
"How now, my lord!","What’s with you, my lord?"
"What sense had I in her stol'n hours of lust? I saw ’t not, thought it not, it harmed not me. I found not Cassio’s kisses on her lips. He that is robbed, not wanting what is stol'n, Let him not know’t, and he’s not robbed at all.","I had no idea she was cheating on me. I never saw it or suspected it, so it never hurt me. I slept well, ate well, and was happy. I never saw Cassio’s kisses on her lips. A man who’s robbed, but doesn’t miss what’s stolen, isn’t robbed at all."
I am sorry to hear this.,I’m sorry to hear this.
"Pioneers and all, had tasted her sweet body, So I had nothing known. Oh, now forever Farewell the tranquil mind! Farewell content! Farewell the plumèd troops and the big wars Farewell the neighing steed and the shrill trump, The spirit-stirring drum, th' ear-piercing fife, The royal banner, and all quality, Pride, pomp, and circumstance of glorious war! The immortal Jove’s dead clamors counterfeit, Farewell! Othello’s occupation’s gone.","I would’ve been happy if the whole army had had sex with her, the lowest-ranking grunts and all, as long as I didn’t know anything about it. Oh, goodbye to my peace of mind! Goodbye to my happiness! Goodbye to the soldiers and to the wars that make men great! Goodbye! Goodbye to the horses and the trumpets and the drums, the flute and the splendid banners, and all those proud displays and pageantry of war! And you deadly cannons that roar like thunderbolts thrown by the gods, goodbye! Othello’s career is over."
"Is ’t possible, my lord?","Is this possible, my lord?"
"Villain, be sure thou prove my love a whore, Or by the worth of mine eternal soul Thou hadst been better have been born a dog Than answer my waked wrath!","You villain, you’d better be able to prove my wife’s a whore! Be sure of it. Get me proof I can see. If you can’t, trust me, you won’t want to feel my rage!"
Is ’t come to this?,Has it come to this?
"Make me to see ’t, or at the least so prove it To hang a doubt on, or woe upon thy life!","Show me, or at least prove it beyond the shadow of a doubt. If you can’t, your life is worthless!"
My noble lord—,My noble lord—
"If thou dost slander her and torture me, Never pray more. Abandon all remorse. Do deeds to make heaven weep, all earth amazed, For nothing canst thou to damnation add Greater than that.","If you’re slandering her just to torture me, then it’ll be no use to pray for mercy or say you’re sorry. You might as well go ahead and commit every unspeakable crime you can think of, because there’s nothing you could that would top what you’ve already done!"
"Oh, grace! Oh, heaven forgive me! Are you a man? Have you a soul or sense? That lov’st to make thine honesty a vice! O monstrous world! Take note, take note, O world, To be direct and honest is not safe. I thank you for this profit, and from hence","Oh, heaven help me! Aren’t you a rational human being? Don’t you have any sense at all? Goodbye. I resign my official position. I’m such an idiot for always telling the truth! What a horrible world we live in! Listen, pay attention, everybody. It’s not safe to be straightforward and honest. I’m glad you’ve taught me this valuable lesson. From now on, I’ll never try to help a friend when it hurts him so much to hear the truth."
"Nay, stay. Thou shouldst be honest.","No, stop. You should always be honest."
"I should be wise, for honesty’s a fool And loses that it works for.","I should always be wise. Honesty’s stupid, it makes me lose my friends even when I’m trying to help them."
"By the world, I think my wife be honest and think she is not. I’ll have some proof. Her name, that was as fresh As Dian’s visage, is now begrimed and black As mine own face. If there be cords or knives, Poison, or fire, or suffocating streams,","I swear, I think my wife’s faithful, and I think she’s not. I think you’re trustworthy one minute and then not the next. I need proof! Her reputation was as pure as the snow, but now it’s as dirty and black as my own face. As long as there are ropes, knives, poison, fire, or streams to drown in By referring to instruments of death, Othello implies that he wants to commit either suicide or murder ropes, knives, poison, fire, or streams to drown in , I won’t stand for this. Oh, how I wish I knew the truth!"
"I see, sir, you are eaten up with passion. I do repent me that I put it to you. You would be satisfied?",I see you’re all eaten up with emotion. I’m sorry I said anything. You want proof?
"Would? Nay, and I will.","Want? Yes, I want it, and I’ll get it."
"And may, but how? How satisfied, my lord? Behold her topped?",But how? How will you get proof? Are you going to hide and watch them having sex?
Death and damnation! Oh!,Death and damnation! Oh!
"It were a tedious difficulty, I think, To bring them to that prospect. Damn them then, If ever mortal eyes do see them bolster What shall I say? Where’s satisfaction? It is impossible you should see this, Were they as prime as goats, as hot as monkeys, As salt as wolves in pride, and fools as gross If imputation and strong circumstances Which lead directly to the door of truth Will give you satisfaction, you may have ’t.","I think it would be very hard to arrange for them to have sex while you watched. If anyone sees them in bed together besides themselves, I guess we could damn them then. So what can we do? What can I say? What proof is there? It’d be impossible for you to watch them, even if they were as horny as animals in heat and as stupid as drunks. But if you would be willing to accept circumstantial evidence as proof, we can get that."
Give me a living reason she’s disloyal.,Give me one good reason to think she’s cheating on me.
"But, sith I am entered in this cause so far, Pricked to ’t by foolish honesty and love, I will go on. I lay with Cassio lately And, being troubled with a raging tooth, So loose of soul that in their sleeps will mutter","I don’t like what you’re asking me to do. But since I’ve gotten myself involved this far, because I’m so stupidly honest and because I like you so much, I’ll keep going. I recently shared a bed with Cassio, and I couldn’t sleep because of a raging toothache. Well, some people talk in their sleep, and Cassio is one of them. I heard him saying, “Sweet Desdemona, let’s be careful and hide our love,” in his sleep. And then he grabbed my hand and said, “Oh, my darling!” and"
"Their affairs. One of this kind is Cassio. In sleep I heard him say “Sweet Desdemona, Let us be wary, let us hide our loves.” Cry “O sweet creature!” and then kiss me hard, As if he plucked up kisses by the roots That grew upon my lips, lay his leg Over my thigh, and sigh, and kiss, and then","kissed me hard, as if he were trying to suck my lips off. Then he put his leg over mine, and sighed and kissed me, and said, “Damn fate for giving you to the Moor!”"
"Oh, monstrous! Monstrous!","Oh, that’s monstrous! Monstrous!"
"Nay, this was but his dream.","No, it was just a dream."
But this denoted a foregone conclusion.,But it shows that something has already happened.
"'Tis a shrewd doubt, though it be but a dream. That do demonstrate thinly.","It’s a reason for suspicion, even though it’s just a dream. And it might back up other evidence that may seem too flimsy."
I’ll tear her all to pieces!,I’ll tear her to pieces!
"Nay, yet be wise, yet we see nothing done, She may be honest yet. Tell me but this, Have you not sometimes seen a handkerchief","No, be reasonable. We don’t have any proof yet. She might still be faithful. Just tell me this: have you ever seen her holding a handkerchief with an embroidered strawberry pattern on it?"
"I gave her such a one, ’twas my first gift.","Yes, I gave her one like that. It was my first gift to her."
"I know not that, but such a handkerchief— I am sure it was your wife’s—did I today See Cassio wipe his beard with.","I don’t know about that, but I saw a handkerchief like that today. I’m sure it belongs to your wife, and I saw Cassio use it to wipe his beard."
If it be that—,If it’s the same one—
It speaks against her with the other proofs.,"If it’s the same one, or any one that belongs to her, then together with the other evidence it’s pretty strong."
"Oh, that the slave had forty thousand lives! One is too poor, too weak for my revenge. Now do I see ’tis true. Look here, Iago, 'Tis gone. Arise, black vengeance, from the hollow hell! Yield up, O love, thy crown and hearted throne To tyrannous hate! Swell, bosom, with thy fraught,","Oh, I’d kill that bastard Cassio forty thousand times if I could! Killing him once is not enough revenge. Now I see it’s true. Oh, Iago, all the love I felt is gone, vanished in the wind. Welcome, hatred and vengeance! Get out of my heart, love! My heart feels like it’s full of poisonous snakes!"
Yet be content.,Calm down—
"Oh, blood, blood, blood!",I want blood!
"Patience, I say. Your mind may change.","Be patient, I’m telling you. You may change your mind later."
"Never, Iago. Like to the Pontic sea, Whose icy current and compulsive course Ne'er keeps retiring ebb but keeps due on Even so my bloody thoughts with violent pace Shall ne'er look back, ne'er ebb to humble love Till that a capable and wide revenge Swallow them up. Now, by yon marble heaven, I here engage my words. (he kneels)","Never, Iago. My thoughts of revenge are flowing through me like a violent river, never turning back to love, only flowing toward full revenge that’ll swallow them up. I swear to God I’ll get revenge. (he kneels)"
"Do not rise yet. Witness, you ever-burning lights above, You elements that clip us round about, Witness that here Iago doth give up To wronged Othello’s service. Let him command, And to obey shall be in me remorse, What bloody business ever.","Don’t get up yet. Let heaven be my witness—I’m putting my mind, my heart, and my hands in Othello’s control. Let him command me, and I’ll do whatever he asks, no matter how violent."
"I greet thy love Not with vain thanks but with acceptance bounteous, Within these three days let me hear thee say That Cassio’s not alive.",I accept your devotion with my deepest love. I’ll put you to the test right away. Within the next three days I want to hear you tell me that Cassio’s dead.
"My friend is dead, 'Tis done at your request. But let her live.","My friend Cassio is dead. It’s done, because you request it. But let her live."
"Damn her, lewd minx! Oh, damn her, damn her! To furnish me with some swift means of death For the fair devil. Now art thou my lieutenant.","Damn her, the wicked whore! Oh, damn her, damn her! Come away with me. I’m going inside to think up some way to kill that beautiful devil. You’re my lieutenant now."
I am your own for ever.,I’m yours forever.
"Do you know, sirrah, where Lieutenant Cassio lies?","Excuse me, do you know which room Lieutenant Cassio lies in lies in = sleeps in lies in ?"
I dare not say he lies anywhere.,I wouldn’t dare say he lies anywhere.
"Why, man?",Why do you say that?
"He’s a soldier, and for one to say a soldier lies, ’tis stabbing.","He’s a soldier. If I accused a soldier of lying, he’d stab me."
Go to. Where lodges he?,"Oh, come on. Where does he sleep?"
To tell you where he lodges is to tell you where I lie.,Telling you where he’s sleeping is like telling you where I’m lying.
Can anything be made of this?,What on earth does that mean?
"I know not where he lodges, and for me to devise a lodging and say he lies here, or he lies there, were to lie in mine own throat.","I don’t know where he’s staying, so if I told you he’s sleeping here or there, I’d be lying."
Can you inquire him out and be edified by report?,Can you ask around and find out?
"I will catechize the world for him, that is, make questions, and by them answer.",I’ll go ask questions everywhere.
"Seek him, bid him come hither. Tell him I have moved my lord on his behalf, and hope all will be well.","Find him and tell him to come here. Tell him I’ve spoken to my husband on his behalf, and I think everything will be all right."
"To do this is within the compass of man’s wit, and therefore I will attempt the doing it.",I think I can do that. It’s not too much to ask.
"Where should I lose that handkerchief, Emilia?","Where could I have lost that handkerchief, Emilia?"
"I know not, madam.","I don’t know, madam."
"Full of crusadoes. And but my noble Moor Is true of mind and made of no such baseness As jealous creatures are, it were enough To put him to ill thinking.","Believe me, I’d rather have lost a purse full of gold coins. This would be enough to make my husband suspect me, if he wasn’t so free of jealousy."
Is he not jealous?,He’s not jealous?
"Who, he? I think the sun where he was born Drew all such humors from him.","Who, him? I think all tendencies to jealousy were burned out of him by the sun of his native land."
Look where he comes.,"Look, here he comes."
I will not leave him now till Cassio,"I won’t leave him alone until he gives Cassio his job back.—How are you, my lord?"
"Well, my good lady.—(aside) Oh, hardness to dissemble!— How do you, Desdemona?","I’m fine, my lady.—(to himself) Oh, it’s so hard to pretend!—How are you, Desdemona?"
"Well, my good lord.","I’m fine, my lord."
"Give me your hand. This hand is moist, my lady.","Give me your hand Moist hands were supposed to indicate a tendency toward love. hand . Your hand’s moist, my lady."
It hath felt no age nor known no sorrow.,It’s moist because it’s still young and inexperienced.
"Hot, hot, and moist. This hand of yours requires A sequester from liberty, fasting, and prayer,","It says you’re fertile, and you’ve got a giving heart. Hot, hot and moist. With a hand like this you need to"
"Much castigation, exercise devout, For here’s a young and sweating devil here, A frank one.","fast and pray to stave off temptations. Someone with a young sweating hand like this one is bound to act up sooner or later. It’s a nice hand, an open one."
"You may indeed say so, For ’twas that hand that gave away my heart.",You’re right to say that. This was the hand that gave you my heart.
"A liberal hand. The hearts of old gave hands, But our new heraldry is hands, not hearts.","This hand gives itself away very freely. In the old days, people used to give their hearts to each other when they joined their hands in marriage. But these days, people give each other their hands without their hearts."
"I cannot speak of this. Come now, your promise.","I don’t know about that. Now, don’t forget, you promised me something."
"What promise, chuck?","What did I promise, my dear?"
I have sent to bid Cassio come speak with you.,I sent for Cassio to come talk with you.
I have a salt and sorry rheum offends me. Lend me thy handkerchief.,I have a bad cold that’s bothering me. Lend me your handkerchief.
"Here, my lord.","Here, my lord."
That which I gave you.,"No, the one I gave you."
I have it not about me.,I don’t have it with me.
Not?,You don’t?
"No, indeed, my lord.","No, my lord."
"That’s a fault. That handkerchief Did an Egyptian to my mother give, She was a charmer and could almost read","That’s not good. An Egyptian woman gave that handkerchief to my mother. She was a witch, and she could"
"The thoughts of people. She told her, while she kept it Entirely to her love, but if she lost it Or made gift of it, my father’s eye Should hold her loathèd and his spirits should hunt After new fancies. She, dying, gave it me To give it her. I did so, and take heed on ’t, Make it a darling like your precious eye. To lose ’t or give ’t away were such perdition As nothing else could match.","almost read people’s thoughts. She told my mother that as long as she kept it with her, my father would love and desire her. But if she lost it or gave it away, my father would start hating her and looking at other women. When she was dying she gave it to me and told me to give it to my wife when I got married. I did. So pay attention. Treat it as something precious. Losing it or giving it away would be an unspeakable loss, a loss like none other."
Is ’t possible?,Is that possible?
"A sibyl, that had numbered in the world The sun to course two hundred compasses, In her prophetic fury sewed the work. The worms were hallowed that did breed the silk, Conserved of maidens' hearts.","Yes, it’s true. There’s magic in its fabric. A two-hundred-year-old witch sewed it while she was in a fevered trance. The silk came from sacred silkworms, and it was dyed with fluid made from embalmed virgins' hearts."
Indeed? Is ’t true?,Really? Is that true?
"Most veritable, therefore look to ’t well.","It’s absolutely true, so take good care of it."
Then would to Heaven that I had never seen ’t!,I wish I had never seen it!
Ha! Wherefore?,Ha! Why?
Why do you speak so startingly and rash?,Why are you yelling at me so angrily?
"Is ’t lost? Is ’t gone? Speak, is ’t out o' th' way?","Is it lost? Is it gone? Tell me, is it missing?"
Bless us!,God help me!
Say you?,What do you have to say for yourself?
"It is not lost, but what and if it were?","It’s not lost, but what if it were?"
How!,What do you mean?
"I say, it is not lost.","I’m telling you, it’s not lost."
"Fetch ’t, let me see ’t.",Then bring it here. Let me see it.
"Why, so I can, sir, but I will not now. This is a trick to put me from my suit. Pray you, let Cassio be received again.","I could, sir. But I don’t want to now. This is just a trick to take my mind off what I’m asking you for. Please hire Cassio again."
Fetch me the handkerchief—my mind misgives.,Bring me the handkerchief—My mind is full of doubt.
"Come, come, You’ll never meet a more sufficient man.",Come on. You know you’ll never find a more capable man.
The handkerchief!,The handkerchief!
"A man that all his time Hath founded his good fortunes on your love,",He’s counted on your friendship for his success. He’s shared dangers with you—
The handkerchief!,The handkerchief!
"In sooth, you are to blame.","Really, I don’t think you’re behaving very well."
Away!,Damn it!
Is not this man jealous?,And you say he’s not jealous?
I ne'er saw this before. I am most unhappy in the loss of it.,I never saw him like this before. There must be some magic in that handkerchief. I’m miserable that I lost it.
"'Tis not a year or two shows us a man. They are all but stomachs, and we all but food. To eat us hungerly, and when they are full,","Men are all the same, but it takes longer than a year or two to see how bad they are. They’re like stomachs and we’re just the food. They eat us up hungrily, and when they’re full, they vomit us up. Look, here comes Cassio and my husband."
"There is no other way. 'Tis she must do ’t, And, lo, the happiness! Go and importune her.","There’s no other way. She’s the one who’s got to do it. And what luck, she’s here! Go ahead and ask her."
"How now, good Cassio, what’s the news with you?","Hello, Cassio. How are you?"
"Madam, my former suit. I do beseech you Exist, and be a member of his love Whom I, with all the office of my heart Entirely honor. I would not be delayed. If my offence be of such mortal kind Nor purposed merit in futurity, Can ransom me into his love again, But to know so must be my benefit. So shall I clothe me in a forced content, To fortune’s alms.","Nothing, madam. Just my earlier request. I’m begging you to help me get back on his good side. I’m devoted to him with all my heart. I can’t wait any longer. If my wrongdoing was so serious that I can’t get back into his good graces either by my past service, or my present situation, or the promise of devoted service in the future, just knowing that would help me. Then I could stop wondering, and find some other career."
"Alas, thrice-gentle Cassio, My advocation is not now in tune. My lord is not my lord, nor should I know him Were he in favor as in humor altered. As I have spoken for you all my best And stood within the blank of his displeasure For my free speech. You must awhile be patient. What I can do I will, and more I will","I’m sorry, dear Cassio, but now is not the right time to bring up your case. My husband’s not himself. If his face changed as much as his personality has, I wouldn’t recognize him. God knows I have done my best to argue for you, and made him angry at me for being so aggressive. You’ll just have to be patient for a little while. I’ll do what I can, more than I’d do for myself. Let that be enough for you."
Is my lord angry?,Is Othello angry?
"He went hence but now, And certainly in strange unquietness.","He just left, clearly upset about something."
"Can he be angry? I have seen the cannon When it hath blown his ranks into the air Puffed his own brother—and is he angry? Something of moment then, I will go meet him. There’s matter in ’t indeed, if he be angry.","Can he even get angry? It’s hard to believe. I’ve seen him stay calm when cannons were blowing his soldiers to bits, even killing his own brother without him batting an eyelid—is he really upset? It must be about something important. I’ll go talk to him. If he’s angry, there must be something seriously wrong."
"I prithee, do so.","Please, do so."
"Something, sure, of state, Made demonstrable here in Cyprus to him, Hath puddled his clear spirit, and in such cases Men’s natures wrangle with inferior things, Though great ones are their object. 'Tis even so, Our other healthful members even to that sense Of pain. Nay, we must think men are not gods, Nor of them look for such observances As fit the bridal. Beshrew me much, Emilia, Arraigning his unkindness with my soul, But now I find I had suborned the witness, And he’s indicted falsely.","There must be some political news from Venice, or some dangerous plot here in Cyprus has ruined his good mood. Men always get angry about little things when they’re really worried about bigger ones. That’s the way it goes. When our finger hurts, it makes the rest of the body hurt too. We shouldn’t expect men to be perfect, or for them to be as polite as on the weddingday. Oh, Emilia, I’m so inexperienced that I thought he was being unkind, but actually I was judging him harshly."
"Pray heaven it be State matters, as you think, and no conception","I hope to God it’s something political, like you think, and not jealousy involving you."
Alas the day! I never gave him cause.,Oh no! I never gave him reason to be jealous.
"But jealous souls will not be answered so. They are not ever jealous for the cause, But jealous for they’re jealous. It is a monster","But jealous people don’t think like that. They’re never jealous for a reason; they’re just jealous. It’s like a monster that just grows and grows, out of nothing."
Heaven keep the monster from Othello’s mind!,I hope God keeps that monster from growing in Othello’s mind!
"Lady, amen.","Amen to that, lady."
"I will go seek him.—Cassio, walk hereabout. If I do find him fit, I’ll move your suit","I’ll go look for him—Cassio, stay around here. If he’s in a good mood I’ll mention you again, and do everything I can."
I humbly thank your ladyship.,"I thank you, lady."
"Save you, friend Cassio!","Hello, Cassio!"
"What make you from home? How is ’t with you, my most fair Bianca? Indeed, sweet love, I was coming to your house.","Why are you so far from home? How are you, my pretty Bianca? To tell you the truth, I was just going to your house."
"What, keep a week away? Seven days and nights? Eight score eight hours? And lovers' absent hours More tedious than the dial eightscore times! Oh weary reckoning!",And I was just going to yours. You’ve kept away from me for a week? Seven days and seven nights? A hundred and sixty-eight hours? And lovers' hours are a hundred and sixty times longer than normal ones! What a tedious wait!
"Pardon me, Bianca, But I shall, in a more continuate time, Strike off this score of absence. Sweet Bianca, (giving her DESDEMONA’s handkerchief) Take me this work out.","I’m sorry, Bianca. All this time I’ve been depressed and had problems on my mind. When I get some free time I’ll make it up to you. (he gives her DESDEMONA ’s handkerchief) Sweet Bianca, would you copy this embroidery pattern for me?"
"O Cassio, whence came this? To the felt absence now I feel a cause. Is ’t come to this? Well, well.","Oh, Cassio, where did you get this? This is a gift from another woman, a new lover! Now I know why you’ve been staying away from me. Has it come to this? Well, well."
"Go to, woman, Throw your vile guesses in the devil’s teeth From whence you have them. You are jealous now No, in good troth, Bianca.","Oh, come on, woman. Stop jumping to silly conclusions. Now you’re jealous, thinking that this is from some mistress of mine, but I swear it’s not, Bianca."
"Why, whose is it?","Well, whose is it?"
"I know not neither, I found it in my chamber. I like the work well. Ere it be demanded, As like enough it will, I would have it copied.","I don’t even know. I found it in my room. It’s pretty. Someone is certainly looking for it, and I’ll have to give it back. So I’d like it copied. Take it and do that for me, and leave me alone for a while."
Leave you! Wherefore?,Leave you alone! Why?
"I do attend here on the general And think it no addition, nor my wish, To have him see me womaned.","I’m waiting here for the general, and I don’t want him to see me with a woman."
"Why, I pray you?",And why’s that?
Not that I love you not.,It’s not because I don’t love you.
But that you do not love me. I pray you bring me on the way a little And say if I shall see you soon at night.,"But you don’t love me. Please, just walk with me a little ways, and tell me if I’ll see you later tonight."
"'Tis but a little way that I can bring you, For I attend here. But I’ll see you soon.","I can only walk a little way with you, since I’m waiting here. But I’ll see you soon."
'Tis very good. I must be circumstanced.,"All right, have it your way. I have to make do."
Will you think so?,Do you really think so?
"Think so, Iago?","What do you mean, do I think so?"
"What, To kiss in private?","What, just because they kissed in private?"
An unauthorized kiss!,An illicit kiss!
"Or to be naked with her friend in bed An hour or more, not meaning any harm?","Maybe she was just naked in bed with him for an hour or so, but they didn’t do anything."
"It is hypocrisy against the devil. They that mean virtuously, and yet do so, The devil their virtue tempts, and they tempt heaven.","Naked in bed together, but without doing anything? Come on, Iago. That would be like playing a trick on the devil: they’d make him think they’re going to commit adultery, but then back off. Anyone who acted like that would be letting the devil tempt them, and tempting God to condemn them."
"So they do nothing, ’tis a venial slip.","As long as they didn’t do anything, it would only be a minor sin. But if I gave my wife a handkerchief—"
What then?,Then what?
"Why then ’tis hers, my lord, and, being hers, She may, I think, bestow ’t on any man.","Then it’s hers. And if it’s hers, I guess she can give it to any man she wants."
She is protectress of her honor too.,Her reputation is also her own. Can she give that away too?
"Her honor is an essence that’s not seen, They have it very oft that have it not. But for the handkerchief—",You can’t see a reputation. A lot of people don’t even deserve the reputations they have. But a handkerchief—
"By heaven, I would most gladly have forgot it. As doth the raven o'er the infectious house, Boding to all—he had my handkerchief.","God, I wish I could forget about the handkerchief! What you told me it haunts me like a nightmare—he’s got my handkerchief!"
"Ay, what of that?","Yes, what about it?"
That’s not so good now.,That’s not good.
"What if I had said I had seen him do you wrong? Who having, by their own importunate suit, Or voluntary dotage of some mistress, Convincèd or supplied them, cannot choose But they must blab—",What if I’d said I saw him do something to hurt you? Or heard him say something about it. You know there are jerks out there who have to brag about bedding some woman.—
Hath he said any thing?,Has he said anything?
No more than he’ll unswear.,"Yes, but he’d deny it all."
What hath he said?,What did he say?
"Why, that he did—I know not what he did.",He said he did—I don’t know.
What? what?,He what?
Lie—,He was in bed with—
With her?,With her?
"With her, on her, what you will.","With her, on top of her—however you want to say it."
"Lie with her? lie on her? We say “lie on her” when they belie her! Lie with her—that’s fulsome. Handkerchief—confessions—handkerchief! To confess, and be hanged for his labor. First to be hanged, and then to confess—I tremble at it. Nature would not invest herself in such shadowing passion without some instruction. It is not words that shake me thus. Pish! Noses, ears, and lips. Is ’t possible? Confess!—Handkerchief!—Oh, devil!—","In bed with her? On top of her? I would have thought people were telling lies about her rather than believe he was lying on her. My God, it’s nauseating! Handkerchief—confessions—handkerchief! I’ll kill him first, and then let him confess—I’m trembling with rage. I wouldn’t be trembling like this if I didn’t know deep down this was all true. Noses, ears, lips. Is it possible? Tell me the truth—Handkerchief—Damn it!"
"And many worthy and chaste dames even thus, All guiltless, meet reproach.—What, ho! My lord! My lord, I say! Othello!","Keep working, poison! This is the way to trick gullible fools. Many good and innocent women are punished for reasons like this.—My lord? My lord, Othello!"
"How now, Cassio!","Hey, Cassio!"
What’s the matter?,What’s the matter?
This is his second fit. He had one yesterday.,Othello’s having some kind of epileptic fit. This is his second fit like this. He had one yesterday.
Rub him about the temples.,Rub his temples.
"No, forbear. The lethargy must have his quiet course. If not, he foams at mouth and by and by Do you withdraw yourself a little while,","No, don’t. This fit has to run its course. If you interrupt it, he’ll foam at the mouth and go crazy. Look, he’s moving. Why don’t you go away for a bit? He’ll get"
He will recover straight. When he is gone I would on great occasion speak with you.,"better right away. When he leaves, it’s very important that I talk to you."
"How is it, general? Have you not hurt your head?","What happened, general? Did you hit your head?"
Dost thou mock me?,Are you making fun of me?
"I mock you not, by heaven. Would you would bear your fortune like a man!","Making fun of you? No, I swear! I wish you could face your bad news like a man!"
A hornèd man’s a monster and a beast.,"A man who’s been cheated on isn’t a real man. He’s subhuman, like an animal."
"There’s many a beast then in a populous city, And many a civil monster.",In that case there are a lot of animals on the loose in this city.
Did he confess it?,Did he confess?
"Good sir, be a man, Think every bearded fellow that’s but yoked May draw with you. There’s millions now alive That nightly lie in those unproper beds Which they dare swear peculiar. Your case is better. To lip a wanton in a secure couch, And to suppose her chaste. No, let me know, And knowing what I am, I know what she shall be.","Sir, be a man. Every married man has been cheated on. Millions of men sleep with wives who cheat on them, wrongly believing they belong to them alone. Your case is better than that. At least you’re not ignorant. The worst thing of all is to kiss your wife thinking she’s innocent, when in fact she’s a whore. No, I’d rather know the truth. Then I’ll know exactly what she is, just as I know what I am."
"Oh, thou art wise! 'Tis certain.",You’re wise! That’s for sure.
"Stand you awhile apart, Whilst you were here o'erwhelmèd with your grief— A passion most resulting such a man— Cassio came hither. I shifted him away And laid good ’scuses upon your ecstasy,","Go somewhere else for a while. Calm down. While you were dazed by grief—which isn’t appropriate for a man like you—Cassio showed up here. I got him to leave, and made up an excuse for your trance. I told him to come back and talk to me in a bit, and he promised he would. So hide here and watch how he sneers"
"The which he promised. Do but encave yourself, And mark the fleers, the gibes, and notable scorns That dwell in every region of his face. For I will make him tell the tale anew He hath, and is again to cope your wife. I say, but mark his gesture. Marry, patience, Or I shall say you are all in all in spleen, And nothing of a man.","at you. I’ll make him tell me the whole story again—where, how often, how long ago—and when he plans to sleep with your wife in the future. I’m telling you, just watch his face. But stay calm, and don’t get carried away by rage, or I’ll think you’re not a man."
"Dost thou hear, Iago? But—dost thou hear?—most bloody.","Do you hear what I’m saying, Iago? I’ll be very patient, but—do you hear me?—I’m not done with him yet"
"That’s not amiss, But yet keep time in all. Will you withdraw?","That’s fine, but for now keep your cool. Will you go hide?"
"Now will I question Cassio of Bianca, A huswife that by selling her desires That dotes on Cassio, as ’tis the strumpet’s plague To beguile many and be beguiled by one. He, when he hears of her, cannot refrain From the excess of laughter. Here he comes.","Now I’ll ask Cassio about Bianca, a prostitute who sells her body for food and clothes. She’s crazy about Cassio. That’s the whore’s curse, to seduce many men, but to be seduced by one. Whenever he talks about her he can’t stop laughing."
"And his unbookish jealousy must construe Poor Cassio’s smiles, gestures, and light behavior Quite in the wrong.—How do you now, lieutenant?","And when he laughs, Othello will go crazy. In his ignorant jealousy, he’ll totally misunderstand Cassio’s smiles, gestures, and jokes.—How are you, lieutenant?"
The worser that you give me the addition,It doesn’t make me feel any better when you call me lieutenant. I’m dying to have that title back again.
"Ply Desdemona well, and you are sure on ’t. Now if this suit lay in Bianca’s power How quickly should you speed!","Just keep asking Desdemona, and it’ll be yours. If it was up to Bianca to get you your job back, you’d have had it already!"
"Alas, poor caitiff!",The poor thing!
Look how he laughs already!,He’s laughing already!
I never knew woman love man so.,I never knew a woman who loved a man so much.
"Alas, poor rogue, I think indeed she loves me.","The poor thing, I really think she loves me."
"Now he denies it faintly, and laughs it out.","Now he denies it a bit, and tries to laugh it off."
"Do you hear, Cassio?","Have you heard this, Cassio?"
"Now he importunes him To tell it o'er. Go to, well said, well said.","He’s asking him to tell the story again. Go on, tell it."
Do you intend it?,She says you’re going to marry her. Are you?
"Ha, ha, ha!","Ha, ha, ha!"
"Do ye triumph, Roman? Do you triumph?",Are you laughing because you’ve won? Do you think you’ve won?
"I marry her! What? A customer? Prithee bear some charity to my wit. Do not think it so unwholesome. Ha, ha, ha!","Me, marry her? That whore? Please give me a little credit! I’m not that stupid. Ha, ha, ha!"
"So, so, so, so! They laugh that win!","So, so, so, so! The winner’s always got the last laugh, hasn’t he?"
Why the cry goes that you shall marry her.,"I swear, there’s a rumor going around that you’ll marry her."
Prithee say true!,You’re kidding!
I am a very villain else.,"If it’s not true, you can call me a villain."
Have you scored me? Well.,"Have you given me bastard children to raise? All right, then."
"This is the monkey’s own giving out. She is persuaded I will marry her, out of her own love and flattery, not out of my promise.",The little monkey must have started that rumor herself. She thinks I’ll marry her because she loves me. She’s just flattering herself. I never promised her anything.
Iago beckons me. Now he begins the story.,Iago is gesturing for me to come closer. Now he’s telling the story.
"She was here even now. She haunts me in every place. I was the other day talking on the sea-bank with certain Venetians, and thither comes the bauble and, by this hand, she falls me thus about my neck—","She was here just now. She hangs around me all the time. I was talking to some Venetians down by the shore, and the fool showed up. I swear to you, she put her arms around me like this—"
Crying “O dear Cassio!” as it were. His gesture imports it.,"Saying, “Oh, Cassio,” it seems, judging by his gestures."
"So hangs and lolls and weeps upon me, so shakes, and pulls me! Ha, ha, ha!","She hangs around me and dangles from my neck and cries, shaking me and pulling at me. Ha, ha, ha!"
"Now he tells how she plucked him to my chamber. Oh, I see that nose of yours, but not that dog I shall throw it to.","Now he’s saying how she took him into our bedroom. Oh, I can see your nose now. But I can’t see the dog I’m going to throw it to."
"Well, I must leave her company.",I have to get rid of her.
"Before me! Look, where she comes.","Look out, here she comes."
"'Tis such another fitchew. Marry, a perfumed one.— What do you mean by this haunting of me?","It’s a whore like all the others, stinking of cheap perfume.—Why are you always hanging around me?"
"Let the devil and his dam haunt you! What did you mean by that same handkerchief you gave me even now? I was a fine fool to take it. I must take out the work? A likely piece of work, that you should find it in your chamber, and not know who left it there! This is some minx’s token, and I must take out the work? There, give it your hobby-horse. Wheresoever you had it, I’ll take out no work on ’t.","Damn you! What did you mean by giving me this handkerchief? I was an idiot to take it! You want me to copy the embroidery pattern? That was a likely story, that you found it in your room and didn’t know who it belonged to. This is a love token from some other slut, and you want me to copy its pattern for you? Give it back to her, I won’t do anything with it."
"How now, my sweet Bianca! How now, how now?","What is it, my dear Bianca? What’s wrong?"
"By heaven, that should be my handkerchief!","My God, that’s my handkerchief!"
"If you’ll come to supper tonight, you may. If you will not, come when you are next prepared for.","If you want to come have dinner with me, you can. If you don’t want to, then good riddance."
"After her, after her.","Go after her, go."
"I must, she’ll rail in the street else.","Actually, I should. She’ll scream in the streets if I don’t."
Will you sup there?,Will you be having dinner with her tonight?
"Yes, I intend so.","Yes, I will."
"Well, I may chance to see you, for I would very fain speak with you.","Well, maybe I’ll see you there. I’d really like to speak with you."
"Prithee come, will you?",Please come. Will you?
Go to! Say no more.,"Don’t talk anymore, go after her."
"(advancing) How shall I murder him, Iago?","(coming forward) How should I murder him, Iago?"
Did you perceive how he laughed at his vice?,Did you see how he laughed about sleeping with her?
O Iago!,Oh Iago!
And did you see the handkerchief?,And did you see the handkerchief?
Was that mine?,Was it mine?
"Yours by this hand. And to see how he prizes the foolish woman your wife! She gave it him, and he hath given it his whore.","It was yours, I swear. And do you see how much your foolish wife means to him? She gave it to him, and he gave it to his whore."
I would have him nine years a-killing. A fine woman! A fair woman! A sweet woman!,"I wish I could keep killing him for nine years straight. Oh, she’s a fine woman! A fair woman! A sweet woman!"
"Nay, you must forget that.","No, you have to forget all that now."
"Ay, let her rot and perish and be damned tonight, for she shall not live. No, my heart is turned to stone. I strike it and it hurts my hand. Oh, the world hath not a sweeter creature, she might lie by an emperor’s side and command him tasks.","Yes, let her die and rot and go to hell tonight. She won’t stay alive for long. No, my heart’s turned to stone—when I hit it, it hurts my hand. Oh, the world never saw a sweeter creature. She could be married to an emperor, and he’d be like her slave!"
"Nay, that’s not your way.",But that’s not how you’re going to be.
"Hang her! I do but say what she is. So delicate with her needle, an admirable musician. Oh, she will sing the savageness out of a bear! Of so high and plenteous wit and invention!","Damn her, I’m just describing her truthfully! She’s so good at sewing, and a wonderful musician. Oh, she could sing a wild bear to sleep! Oh, she’s so witty and creative!"
She’s the worse for all this.,"All the worse that she stooped this low, then."
"Oh, a thousand thousand times—and then of so gentle a condition!","Oh, a thousand times worse, a thousand times—and what a sweet personality she has!"
"Ay, too gentle.","Yes, a little too sweet."
"Nay, that’s certain. But yet the pity of it, Iago! O Iago, the pity of it, Iago!","Yes, that’s for sure. Oh, it’s dreadful, dreadful, Iago!"
"If you are so fond over her iniquity, give her patent to offend, for if it touch not you it comes near nobody.","If you still feel so affectionate toward her, then why not give her permission to cheat on you? If it doesn’t bother you, it won’t bother anyone else."
I will chop her into messes! Cuckold me?,I’ll chop her into pieces. How could she cheat on me?
"Oh, ’tis foul in her.","Oh, it’s horrible of her."
With mine officer!,And with my own officer!
That’s fouler.,That’s worse.
"Get me some poison, Iago, this night. I’ll not expostulate with her, lest her body and beauty unprovide my mind again—This night, Iago!","Get me some poison tonight, Iago. I won’t argue with her, so her beautiful body won’t disarm me.—Tonight, Iago."
"Do it not with poison. Strangle her in her bed, even the bed she hath contaminated.","Don’t do it with poison. Strangle her in her bed, the same bed she’s contaminated."
"Good, good, the justice of it pleases! Very good!","Good, good, I like that—it’s only fair! Very good!"
"And for Cassio, let me be his undertaker. You shall hear more by midnight.",And let me kill Cassio. You’ll hear more from me by midnight.
Excellent good.,"Excellent, good."
What trumpet is that same?,What’s that trumpet for?
"I warrant something from Venice. 'Tis Lodovico, this, comes from the duke. See, your wife’s with him.","I think someone’s coming from Venice. It’s Lodovico. He must be coming from the duke. Look, your wife is with him."
"Save you, worthy general!","Greetings, good general!"
"With all my heart, sir.","Greetings, sir."
The duke and senators of Venice greet you.,The duke and senators of Venice greet you.
I kiss the instrument of their pleasures.,I’ll do whatever they order me to do in this letter.
"And what’s the news, good cousin Lodovico?","What’s new, cousin Lodovico?"
"I am very glad to see you, signior. Welcome to Cyprus.","Very nice to see you, sir. Welcome to Cyprus."
I thank you. How does lieutenant Cassio?,Thank you. How is lieutenant Cassio?
"Lives, sir.","Well, he’s alive."
"An unkind breach, but you shall make all well.","Cousin, there’s been a falling out between him and Othello. An unfortunate rift, but you can fix it."
Are you sure of that?,Are you sure of that?
My lord?,Excuse me?
"(reads) “This fail you not to do, as you will—”","(reading) “Don’t fail to do this, since you’ll—”"
Is there division ’twixt my lord and Cassio?,"He didn’t say anything, he’s reading. So there’s a rift between Othello and Cassio?"
"A most unhappy one. I would do much T' atone them, for the love I bear to Cassio.","Yes, unfortunately. I’d do anything to bring them back together, since I really care for Cassio."
Fire and brimstone!,Damn it all!
My lord?,"Excuse me, my lord?"
Are you wise?,Are you in your right mind?
"What, is he angry?",Is he angry?
"Maybe the letter moved him, For, as I think, they do command him home, Deputing Cassio in his government.",Maybe the letter upset him. I think they want him to go home and appoint Cassio governor in his place.
"Trust me, I am glad on ’t.",I’m happy about that.
Indeed!,"Oh, are you really!"
My lord?,My lord?
I am glad to see you mad.,I’m glad you’re insane enough to admit it in front of me.
"Why, sweet Othello—","Why, sweet Othello—"
(striking her) Devil!,(striking her) You devil!
I have not deserved this.,I haven’t done anything to deserve this!
"Though I should swear I saw ’t. 'Tis very much. Make her amends, she weeps.","My lord, no one will believe this in Venice, even though I’d swear I saw it with my own eyes. That was too much. You should apologize. She’s crying."
"Oh, devil, devil! If that the earth could teem with woman’s tears, Each drop she falls would prove a crocodile.","Oh, you devil, you devil! You can cry all day and all night, and I still won’t believe you’re sad. Get out of my sight!"
I will not stay to offend you.,I wouldn’t want to stay here and make you angry.
"Truly, an obedient lady. I do beseech your lordship, call her back.","She’s obedient—a fine lady. Please, my lord, call her back."
Mistress!,Madam!
My lord?,My lord?
"What would you with her, sir?","What do you want with her, sir?"
"Who, I, my lord?","Who, me?"
"Ay, you did wish that I would make her turn. Sir, she can turn, and turn, and yet go on, And she’s obedient, as you say, obedient, Very obedient.—Proceed you in your tears.— Concerning this, sir—Oh, well-painted passion!— I am commanded home.—Get you away, And will return to Venice.—Hence, avaunt!","Yes, you asked me to call her back. See how well she can turn? She can turn and turn, and then turn on you again. And she can cry, sir—oh, how she can cry! And she’s obedient, as you say, obedient. Very obedient—keep crying.—Concerning this—oh, what fake emotion!—I am being ordered home—Get away from me, I’ll send for you later.—Sir, I’ll obey the order and return to Venice. Get away from me, you witch!"
"Cassio shall have my place. And, sir, tonight I do entreat that we may sup together. You are welcome, sir, to Cyprus. Goats and monkeys!","Cassio can have my job. And tonight, sir, I invite you have dinner with me. Welcome to Cyprus. Horny animals!"
Call all in all sufficient? Is this the nature Whom passion could not shake? Whose solid virtue The shot of accident nor dart of chance Could neither graze nor pierce?,"Is this the same Moor whom the senate considers so capable? Is this the guy who’s supposed to never get emotional, and who never gets rattled, no matter what disaster happens?"
He is much changed.,He’s changed a great deal.
Are his wits safe? Is he not light of brain?,Is he sane? Is he losing his mind?
"He’s that he is. I may not breathe my censure What he might be. If what he might he is not, I would to heaven he were!","He is what he is. I won’t say anything negative about what he might be. If he isn’t what he might be, then I wish to God he were!"
What? Strike his wife?,Hitting his wife?
"'Faith, that was not so well. Yet would I knew","It’s true, that wasn’t such a nice thing to do. But I wish I could say that’s the last time he’ll do it!"
Is it his use? Or did the letters work upon his blood And new-create his fault?,"Is it a habit of his? Or did the letter make him emotional somehow, and this is the first time he’s done it?"
"Alas, alas! It is not honesty in me to speak What I have seen and known. You shall observe him, That I may save my speech. Do but go after And mark how he continues.","Oh, it’s too bad! It wouldn’t be right for me to tell you everything I’ve seen and heard. You’ll see what he’s like. His own actions will show you what kind of person he is, so I won’t have to bother telling you. Just go after him and watch what he does next."
I am sorry that I am deceived in him.,I’m sorry I was so wrong about him.
You have seen nothing then?,"You haven’t seen anything, then?"
"Nor ever heard, nor ever did suspect.","No, and I didn’t hear anything either, or suspect anything at all."
"Yes, you have seen Cassio and she together.",But you’ve seen her and Cassio together.
"But then I saw no harm, and then I heard","Yes, but I didn’t see anything wrong, and I heard every syllable they said."
"What, did they never whisper?",Didn’t they ever whisper?
"Never, my lord.","Never, my lord."
Nor send you out o' th' way?,Or ask you to leave the room?
Never.,Never.
"To fetch her fan, her gloves, her mask, nor nothing?","Not even to get her fan, or her gloves, or her mask, or anything?"
"Never, my lord.","No, my lord."
That’s strange.,That’s strange.
"I durst, my lord, to wager she is honest, Lay down my soul at stake. If you think other If any wretch have put this in your head Let heaven requite it with the serpent’s curse For if she be not honest, chaste, and true There’s no man happy. The purest of their wives","I’d swear to you on my soul that she’s a good, honest person, sir. If you suspect otherwise, stop thinking that right now because you’re wrong. If any jerk has tried to convince you she’s bad, I hope God curses him. If she’s not honest, faithful, and true, then there’s no such thing as a faithful wife or a happy husband."
Bid her come hither. Go.,Tell her to come here. Go.
"She says enough, yet she’s a simple bawd That cannot say as much. This is a subtle whore, A closet, lock and key, of villainous secrets. And yet she’ll kneel and pray, I have seen her do ’t.","She says all the right things, but the dumbest brothel-keeper would tell the same story. Desdemona’s a tricky whore with a closet full of awful secrets, but still she’ll kneel and pray like an honest woman. I’ve seen her do it."
"My lord, what is your will?","My lord, what do you want?"
"Pray, chuck, come hither.","Please, dear, come here."
What is your pleasure?,What can I do for you?
Let me see your eyes. Look in my face.,Let me see your eyes. Look at my face.
What horrible fancy’s this?,What horrible thing are you imagining?
"(to EMILIA) Some of your function, mistress, Cough or cry “hem” if any body come. Your mystery, your mystery! Nay, dispatch!","(to EMILIA) Go do what you do best, madam. Leave us alone for our hanky-panky, and shut the door behind you. If somebody comes, give a shout. That’s your job Othello implies that Emilia\’s job is to help men and women have illicit sex. job , your job. Go on, hurry!"
"Upon my knee, what doth your speech import? I understand a fury in your words,","I’m begging you on my knees to tell me what your words mean. I can tell you’re furious, but I don’t understand what you’re saying."
"Why, what art thou?",Why? Who are you?
"Your wife, my lord. Your true and loyal wife.","I’m your wife, your true and loyal wife."
"Come, swear it, damn thyself. Lest, being like one of heaven, the devils themselves Should fear to seize thee. Therefore be double damned,","Go ahead, swear to that, so you’ll be damned to hell for lying. Otherwise the devils will mistake you for an angel and be too scared to grab you. Go ahead, make sure you damn yourself by swearing you’ve been faithful to me."
Heaven doth truly know it.,Heaven knows I am.
Heaven truly knows that thou art false as hell.,Heaven knows you’re as unfaithful as hell.
"To whom, my lord? With whom? How am I false?","Unfaithful, my lord? With whom? How am I unfaithful?"
"Ah, Desdemona, away, away, away!","Leave me alone, Desdemona, go away!"
"Alas the heavy day, why do you weep? If haply you my father do suspect An instrument of this your calling back, Lay not your blame on me. If you have lost him, Why, I have lost him too.","Oh, what a horrible day! Why are you crying? Because of me? If you’ve been ordered back to Venice because of my father, don’t blame me. You may have lost his respect, but so have I."
"Had it pleased heaven All kinds of sores and shames on my bare head, Steeped me in poverty to the very lips, Given to captivity me and my utmost hopes, I should have found in some place of my soul","If God had decided to treat me like Job, making me sick and covered with sores, reducing me to abject poverty, selling me into slavery and destroying all my hopes, I would have found some way to accept it with patience. But instead He’s made me a laughingstock for everyone in our time to point at and scorn! Even that I could put up with. But instead, my wife, who’s supposed to"
"The fixèd figure for the time of scorn To point his slow and moving finger at! Yet could I bear that too, well, very well. But there where I have garnered up my heart, The fountain from the which my current runs Or else dries up—to be discarded thence! Or keep it as a cistern for foul toads To knot and gender in! Turn thy complexion there, Ay, there, look grim as hell!","be like the fountain that my children and all my descendants flow from, has rejected me! Worse than that, she’s polluted herself, so that the fountain is a place where disgusting toads copulate and reproduce! Even the goddess of patience couldn’t look at this and be patient—it’s too horrifying!"
I hope my noble lord esteems me honest.,I hope you think I’m faithful to you.
"Oh, ay, as summer flies are in the shambles, That quicken even with blowing. O thou weed, That the sense aches at thee, would thou hadst ne'er been born!","As faithful as flies in rotting meat, which give birth to maggots every time the wind blows. You’re like a weed pretending to be a flower, so beautiful and sweet-smelling that I ache when I look at you. Oh, I wish you’d never been born!"
"Alas, what ignorant sin have I committed?",Have I done something to offend you without knowing it?
"Was this fair paper, this most goodly book, Made to write “whore” upon? What committed? I should make very forges of my cheeks That would to cinders burn up modesty Did I but speak thy deeds. What committed? Heaven stops the nose at it and the moon winks, Is hushed within the hollow mine of earth And will not hear ’t. What committed! Impudent strumpet!","Was someone as beautiful as you meant to be a whore? What have you done? What have you done? Oh, you streetwalker! If I said out loud what you’ve done, you’d burn up with shame. What have you done? Heaven has to hold its nose when it sees you! The pure moon in the sky has to shut its eyes when you go by! Even the wind that blows over everything on earth is ashamed to visit you. You brazen whore!"
"By heaven, you do me wrong!",I swear to God you’re accusing me wrongly!
Are you not a strumpet?,So you’re saying you’re not a whore?
"No, as I am a Christian. If to preserve this vessel for my lord From any other foul unlawful touch Be not to be a strumpet, I am none.","No, I’m as honest as I am Christian. If only letting my husband touch my body means I’m not a whore, I’m not a whore."
"What, not a whore?","What, you’re not a whore?"
"No, as I shall be saved.","No, I swear it."
Is ’t possible?,Is that possible?
"Oh, heaven forgive us!","Oh, heaven help us!"
"I cry you mercy, then, I took you for that cunning whore of Venice That have the office opposite to Saint Peter And keep the gate of hell!",I beg your pardon then. I must have the wrong woman. I mistook you for that sly Venetian woman who married Othello.—You whorehouse-keeper.
"You, you, ay, you! We have done our course. There’s money for your pains. I pray you, turn the key and keep our counsel.",You’re in charge of this hell! You! We’ve finished our business. Here’s some money for you. Please lock the door and keep quiet.
"How do you, madam? How do you, my good lady?","What’s he talking about? How are you, madam?"
"Faith, half asleep.","I’m stunned, to tell you the truth."
"Good madam, what’s the matter with my lord?","My lady, what’s wrong with your husband?"
With who?,With who?
"Why, with my lord, madam.","Why, with your husband, madam. My lord."
Who is thy lord?,Who’s your lord?
"He that is yours, sweet lady.",My lord is your lord.
"I have none. Do not talk to me, Emilia. I cannot weep, nor answers have I none, But what should go by water. Prithee, tonight Lay on my bed my wedding sheets. Remember,","I don’t have a lord. Don’t talk to me, Emilia. I can’t even cry, though tears are the only answers I could give to all your questions. Tonight put my wedding sheets on my bed, and tell your husband to come to me now."
Here’s a change indeed!,Things have certainly changed!
"'Tis meet I should be used so, very meet. How have I been behaved that he might stick The small’st opinion on my least misuse?","It’s fair for him to treat me like this, very fair. What have I ever done that he has anything to complain about?"
"What is your pleasure, madam? How is ’t with you?","What can I do for you, madam? How are you?"
"Do it with gentle means and easy tasks. He might have chid me so, for, in good faith, I am a child to chiding.","I don’t know. When grown-ups teach little children, they do it gently and easily. He might have treated me like that, because I’m as unused to abuse as a little child."
"What is the matter, lady?","What’s the matter, lady?"
"Alas, Iago, my lord hath so bewhored her, That true hearts cannot bear it.","He called her a whore so many times, and heaped up so much abuse on her that good people can’t stand to hear it."
"Am I that name, Iago?","Am I that name, Iago?"
"What name, fair lady?","What name, madam?"
Such as she says my lord did say I was.,What my lord said I was.
Could not have laid such terms upon his callet.,He called her a whore. A beggar couldn’t have called his slut worse names.
Why did he so?,Why did he do that?
I do not know. I am sure I am none such.,I don’t know. I just know I’m not one.
"Do not weep, do not weep. Alas the day!","Don’t cry, don’t cry. What a day this is!"
"Her father and her country, and her friends, To be called “whore”? Would it not make one weep?","Did she give up all those chances to marry noblemen, give up her father and country and friends, just to be called a whore? Doesn’t that make you want to cry?"
It is my wretched fortune.,It’s just my bad luck.
Beshrew him for ’t! How comes this trick upon him?,Damn him! How did he get such an idea?
"Nay, heaven doth know.",Heaven knows.
"Some busy and insinuating rogue, Some cogging, cozening slave, to get some office, Have not devised this slander. I will be hanged else!","I bet my life some evil busybody, some meddling, lying jerk made up this rumor to get some position. I bet my life on it."
"Fie, there is no such man. It is impossible.",Nobody’s that bad. It’s impossible.
"If any such there be, heaven pardon him!","If there is, then heaven help him!"
"A halter pardon him and hell gnaw his bones! Why should he call her “whore”? Who keeps her company? What place? What time? What form? What likelihood? The Moor’s abused by some most villainous knave, O heavens, that such companions thou’dst unfold, And put in every honest hand a whip To lash the rascals naked through the world Even from the east to th' west!","A hangman’s noose will help him! Let hell chew him up! Why should he call her a whore? Who’s been with her? When has she had the time, the place, or the means to sleep with anyone? How is this at all likely? The Moor is being tricked by some crook, some terrible villain, some rotten bastard. Oh, I wish we could unmask scoundrels like that, and give a whip to every good man to beat them senseless with!"
Speak within door.,Keep your voice down.
That turned your wit the seamy side without And made you to suspect me with the Moor.,"Oh, to hell with those people! It’s the same kind of guy who got you upset and made you suspect I’d cheated on you with the Moor."
You are a fool. Go to.,You’re a fool. Shut up.
"Alas Iago, What shall I do to win my lord again? I know not how I lost him. Here I kneel: If e'er my will did trespass 'gainst his love, Either in discourse of thought or actual deed, Or that mine eyes, mine ears, or any sense, Or that I do not yet, and ever did,","Oh God, Iago, what can I do to win my husband back again? Please go to him, my friend. I swear I have no idea why he stopped loving me. Here I’m kneeling to swear that if I ever did anything to destroy his love for me, either by thoughts or actions, or if I ever took pleasure in anyone else, or if I never did love him, or don’t love him now—even though he tries to shake me off—"
"And ever will—though he do shake me off To beggarly divorcement—love him dearly, Comfort forswear me! Unkindness may do much, But never taint my love. I cannot say “whore,” It does abhor me now I speak the word. To do the act that might the addition earn Not the world’s mass of vanity could make me.","then I hope I have a life of misery! Unkindness is powerful, and his unkindness may kill me, but it’ll never destroy my love. I can’t say “whore.” It makes me sick to say the word even now. I wouldn’t do the thing that would make me a whore for all the money in the world."
"The business of the state does him offence, And he does chide with you.","Please calm down. He’s just in a bad mood. Political business is bothering him, and he’s just taking it out on you."
If ’twere no other—,If only that were all it is—
"'Tis but so, I warrant.","It is, I promise."
"The messengers of Venice stays the meat. Go in, and weep not. All things shall be well.","Those trumpets are calling us in to dinner. The Venetians are waiting for their food. Go in, and don’t cry. Everything will be all right."
"How now, Roderigo!","How are you, Roderigo?"
I do not find that thou deal’st justly with me.,I don’t think you’re treating me fairly.
What in the contrary?,What makes you say that?
"Every day thou daff’st me with some device, Iago, and rather, as it seems to me now, keep’st from me all conveniency than suppliest me with the least advantage of hope.","Every day you put me off with some trick. Instead of finding opportunities for me, you seem to be preventing me from making any progress."
"I will indeed no longer endure it, nor am I yet persuaded to put up in peace what already I have foolishly suffered.","Well, I won’t take it any longer. And I’m not going to sit back and accept what you’ve done."
"Will you hear me, Roderigo?","Will you listen to me, Roderigo?"
"I have heard too much, and your words and performances are no kin together.",I’ve listened to you too much already. Your words and actions don’t match up.
You charge me most unjustly.,That’s not fair.
"With naught but truth. I have wasted myself out of my means. The jewels you have had from me to deliver Desdemona would half have corrupted a votaress. You have told me she hath received them and returned me expectations and comforts of sudden respect and acquaintance, but I find none.","It’s the truth. I’ve got no money left. The jewels you took from me to deliver to Desdemona would’ve made even a nun want to sleep with me. You told me she got them, and that she promised to give me a little something in return soon, but nothing like that ever happens."
"Well, go to. Very well.","Well, all right then. Fine."
"“Very well,” “go to”! I cannot go to, man, nor ’tis not very well. Nay, I think it is scurvy, and begin to find myself fopped in it.","“Fine!” he says. “All right!” It’s not fine, and I’m not all right! It’s wrong, and I’m starting to realize I’m being cheated!"
Very well.,Okay.
"I tell you ’tis not very well. I will make myself known to Desdemona. If she will return me my jewels I will give over my suit and repent my unlawful solicitation. If not, assure yourself I will seek satisfaction of you.","It’s not okay! I’m going to tell Desdemona my feelings. If she returns my jewels, I’ll stop pursuing her and apologize to her. If not, I’ll challenge you to a duel."
You have said now.,You’ve said what you have to say now.
"Ay, and said nothing but what I protest intendment of doing.","Yes, and I’ll do everything I just said."
"Why, now I see there’s mettle in thee, and even from this instant to build on thee a better opinion than ever before. Give me thy hand, Roderigo. Thou hast taken against me a most just exception, but yet I protest I have dealt most directly in thy affair.","Well, all right then. Now I see that you have some guts. From this moment on I have a higher opinion of you than before. Give me your hand, Roderigo. Your complaint against me is perfectly understandable, but I still insist I’ve done everything I could to help you."
It hath not appeared.,It doesn’t look that way to me.
"I grant indeed it hath not appeared, and your suspicion is not without wit and judgment. But, Roderigo, if thou hast that in thee indeed, which I have greater reason to believe now than ever—I mean purpose, courage and valor—this night show it. If thou the next night following enjoy not Desdemona, take me from this world with treachery and devise engines for my life.","I admit it doesn’t look that way to me, and the fact that you suspect me shows that you’re smart. But Roderigo, if you’re as courageous and determined as I think you are, then wait just a bit longer. If you’re not having sex with Desdemona tomorrow night, then I suggest you find some way to stab me in the back and kill me."
"Well, what is it? Is it within reason and compass?","Well, what’s your plan? Is it feasible?"
"Sir, there is especial commission come from Venice to depute Cassio in Othello’s place.",Venice has made Cassio governor here on Cyprus.
"Is that true? Why, then Othello and Desdemona return again to Venice.",Is that true? Then Desdemona and Othello will go back to Venice.
"Oh, no, he goes into Mauritania and taketh away with him the fair Desdemona, unless his abode be lingered here by some accident—wherein none can be so determinate as the removing of Cassio.","Oh, no. He’ll go to Mauritania and take the beautiful Desdemona with him, unless he gets stuck here for some reason. The best way to extend his stay here is to get rid of Cassio."
"How do you mean, removing of him?","What do you mean, get rid of him?"
"Why, by making him uncapable of Othello’s place: knocking out his brains.","I mean knock his brains out, so he can’t take Othello’s place."
And that you would have me to do!,And that’s what you want me to do!
"Ay, if you dare do yourself a profit and a right. He sups tonight with a harlotry, and thither will I go to him. He knows not yet of his honorable fortune. If you will watch his going thence (which I will fashion to fall out between twelve and one) you may take him at your pleasure. I will be near to second your attempt, and he shall fall between us. Come, stand not amazed at it, but go along with me. I will show you such a necessity in his death that you shall think yourself bound to put it on him. It is now high suppertime, and the night grows to waste. About it!","Yes, if you want to help yourself. He’s having dinner tonight with a prostitute, and I’ll go visit him. He doesn’t know he’s been appointed governor yet. When you see him walking by here (as I’ll make sure he does between twelve and one) you can nab him. I’ll be nearby to help you, and between the two of us we can handle him. Come on, don’t stand there in a daze. Come along with me. I’ll give you such reasons for killing him that you’ll feel obliged to snuff him out. It’s nearly dinner time, and the night’s going to be wasted. Let’s go!"
I will hear further reason for this.,I want to hear more about this.
And you shall be satisfied.,You will. You’ll hear all you want to hear.
"I do beseech you, sir, trouble yourself no further.","Please, sir, don’t trouble yourself."
"Oh, pardon me, ’twill do me good to walk.",I beg your pardon; walking will make me feel better.
"Madam, good night. I humbly thank your ladyship.","Good night, madam. Thank you."
Your honor is most welcome.,You’re most welcome.
"Will you walk, sir?—O Desdemona—","Would you walk out with me, sir?—Oh, Desdemona—"
My lord?,"Yes, my lord?"
"Get you to bed on th' instant, I will be returned Forthwith. Dismiss your attendant there, look ’t be done.",Go to bed right this minute. I’ll be there shortly. Send your maid Emilia away. Make sure you do what I say.
"I will, my lord.","I will, my lord."
How goes it now? He looks gentler than he did.,How are things now? He looks calmer than he did before.
"He says he will return incontinent, And hath commanded me to go to bed And bid me to dismiss you.",He says he’ll come back right away. He asked me to go to bed and to send you away.
Dismiss me?,Send me away?
"It was his bidding. Therefore, good Emilia, We must not now displease him.","That’s what he said. So give me my nightgown, Emilia, and I’ll say goodnight. We shouldn’t displease him."
Ay. Would you had never seen him!,Yes. I wish you’d never met him.
"So would not I. My love doth so approve him That even his stubbornness, his checks, his frowns—","That’s not what I wish. I love him even when he’s harsh and mean—Help me unpin this, would you?—I love even his stubbornness, his frowns, his bad moods."
I have laid those sheets you bade me on the bed.,"I put those wedding sheets on your bed, as you asked."
"All’s one. Good Father, how foolish are our minds! If I do die before thee, prithee, shroud me In one of these same sheets.","It doesn’t matter. Oh, how silly we are! If I die before you do make sure I’m wrapped in those sheets in my coffin."
"Come, come! You talk!",Listen to you! Don’t be silly!
"She was in love, and he she loved proved mad And did forsake her. She had a song of “Willow,” An old thing ’twas, but it expressed her fortune And she died singing it. That song tonight But to go hang my head all at one side And sing it like poor Barbary. Prithee, dispatch.","My mother had a maid named Barbary. She was in love, and her lover turned out to be wild and left her. She knew an old song called “Willow” that reminded her of her own story, and she died singing it. I can’t get that song out of my head tonight. It’s all I can do to keep myself from hanging my head down in despair and singing it like poor Barbary. Please, hurry up."
Shall I go fetch your nightgown?,Should I get your nightgown?
"No, unpin me here. This Lodovico is a proper man.","No, just help me unpin this. That Lodovico is a good-looking man."
A very handsome man.,He’s very handsome.
He speaks well.,He speaks well.
I know a lady in Venice would have walked barefoot to Palestine for a touch of his nether lip.,I know a lady in Venice who’d walk all the way to Palestine for a kiss from him.
"(singing) The poor soul sat sighing by a sycamore tree, Sing all a green willow. Her hand on her bosom, her head on her knee, Sing willow, willow, willow. The fresh streams ran by her, and murmured her moans, Sing willow, willow, willow. Her salt tears fell from her, and softened the stones Sing willow, willow, willow— Lay by these— Willow, willow— Prithee, hie thee, he’ll come anon— Sing all a green willow must be my garland. Let nobody blame him, his scorn I approve— Nay, that’s not next—Hark! Who is ’t that knocks?","(singing) The poor soul sat singing by the sycamore tree, Everyone sing the green willow, She had her hand on her breast and her head on her knee, Sing willow, willow, willow. The fresh streams ran by her and murmured her moans, Sing willow, willow, willow. Her salt tears fell from her and softened the stones, Sing willow, willow, willow.— Put these things over there.— Please, hurry, he’ll come right away.— Everyone sing, a green willow must be my garland. Nobody blame him, he’s right to hate me— No, that’s not how it goes.—Who’s knocking?"
It’s the wind.,It’s the wind.
"I called my love false love but what said he then? Sing willow, willow, willow. If I court more women you’ll couch with more men— So, get thee gone, good night. Mine eyes do itch, Doth that bode weeping?","(singing) I told my lover he didn’t love me, but what did he say? Sing willow, willow, willow. If I chase more women, you’ll sleep with more men—Okay, go away now. Good night. My eyes itch—is that an omen I’ll be crying soon?"
'Tis neither here nor there.,"No, it doesn’t mean anything."
"Dost thou in conscience think—tell me, Emilia— That there be women do abuse their husbands In such gross kind?","I heard someone say that’s what it means. Oh, these men, these men! Do you honestly think—tell me, Emilia—there are women who’d cheat on their husbands in such a disgusting manner?"
"There be some such, no question.","There are women like that out there, no question."
Wouldst thou do such a deed for all the world?,Would you ever do such a thing for all the world?
"Why, would not you?","Why, wouldn’t you?"
"No, by this heavenly light!","By the light of heaven, no, I would not!"
"Nor I neither, by this heavenly light. I might do ’t as well i' th' dark.","I wouldn’t either, by daylight. It would be easier to do it in the dark."
Wouldst thou do such a deed for all the world?,"Could you really do such a thing, for all the world?"
The world’s a huge thing. It is a great price for a small vice.,The world’s huge. It’s a big prize for such a small sin.
"In troth, I think thou wouldst not.",I don’t think you would.
"In troth, I think I should, and undo ’t when I had done. Marry, I would not do such a thing for a joint-ring, nor for measures of lawn, nor for gowns, petticoats, nor caps, nor any petty exhibition. But for the whole world? Why, who would not make her husband a cuckold to make him a monarch? I should venture purgatory for ’t.","Actually I think I would, and then I’d undo it after I did it. I wouldn’t do it for a nice ring, or fine linen, or pretty gowns or petticoats or hats. But for the whole world? Who wouldn’t cheat on her husband to make him king? I’d risk my soul for that."
"Beshrew me, if I would do such a wrong For the whole world.","I’d never do such a bad thing, not for the whole world!"
"Why the wrong is but a wrong i' th' world, and having the world for your labor, ’tis a wrong in your own world, and you might quickly make it right.","Why, a bad action is just a wrong in this world, but when you’ve won the whole world, it’s a wrong in your own world, so you can make it right then."
I do not think there is any such woman.,I don’t think any woman like that exists.
"Yes, a dozen, and as many to th' vantage as would store the world they played for. But I do think it is their husbands' faults If wives do fall. Say that they slack their duties","Yes, a dozen of them—as many as there are women in the world, in fact. But I do think it’s the husband’s fault if we wives cheat on them. For instance, our husbands"
"And pour our treasures into foreign laps, Throwing restraint upon us. Or say they strike us, Or scant our former having in despite. Why, we have galls, and though we have some grace, Yet have we some revenge. Let husbands know And have their palates both for sweet and sour, As husbands have. What is it that they do When they change us for others? Is it sport? I think it is. And doth affection breed it? It is so too. And have not we affections, Desires for sport, and frailty, as men have? Then let them use us well, else let them know, The ills we do, their ills instruct us so.","may stop sleeping with us, and give it out to other women instead. Or they may get insanely jealous, and keep us from going anywhere. Or let’s say they hit us, or cut back on the money they give us out of spite. We have feelings. We may be able to forgive them, but we want to get back at them too. Husbands need to know that their wives are human beings too. They see, smell, and taste sweet and sour just like their husbands. Why do they replace us with other women? Do they do it for fun? I think they do. Is it out of lust? I think so. Is it a weakness? It is. And don’t we have passions, and a taste for fun, and weaknesses, just like men? Then tell them to treat us well. Or let them figure out that the bad things we do are just what we learned from them."
"Not to pick bad from bad, but by bad mend!","Good night, good night. I pray that God will let me learn from women like that—not to follow their bad example, but to avoid it!"
"Here, stand behind this bulk, straight will he come. Wear thy good rapier bare, and put it home. Quick, quick! Fear nothing. I’ll be at thy elbow. It makes us, or it mars us. Think on that,","Here, stand behind this wall; he’ll come right away. Keep your sword out, and then stick it in as far as it’ll go. Quick, quick. Don’t be afraid. I’ll be right next to you. This will either make us or break us. Keep that in mind, and be steady."
"Be near at hand, I may miscarry in ’t.",Stay right near me. I may mess it up.
"Here, at thy hand. Be bold, and take thy stand.","I’m right behind you. Be bold, and get ready."
I have no great devotion to the deed And yet he hath given me satisfying reasons.,"I don’t really want to do this, but he’s given me good reasons. I guess it’s only one man—no big deal. My sword comes out, and he dies."
"(aside) I have rubbed this young quat almost to the sense, And he grows angry. Now, whether he kill Cassio Or Cassio him, or each do kill the other, Every way makes my gain. Live Roderigo, Of gold and jewels that I bobbed from him As gifts to Desdemona. It must not be. If Cassio do remain He hath a daily beauty in his life May unfold me to him—there stand I in much peril. No, he must die. But so, I hear him coming.","(to himself) I’ve rubbed this young pimple until he’s ready to pop, and now he’s angry. Whether he kills Cassio, or Cassio kills him, or they kill each other, it all works in my favor. If Roderigo survives, though, he’ll ask me for all the gold and jewelry that I stole from him and said I gave to Desdemona. I can’t let that happen. If Cassio survives,he’s so handsome and well-spoken that he makes me look ugly. And besides, the Moor might tell him about my lies about him.—That would be very dangerous for me. No, he’s got to die. Let it be so. I hear him coming."
"I know his gait, ’tis he.—Villain, thou diest!","I know the sound of his walk.—Die, villain!"
That thrust had been mine enemy indeed I will make proof of thine.,That thrust might really have hurt me if I didn’t have this armor on under my cloak. Now let’s see what you’ve got on.
"Oh, I am slain!","Oh, I’m dead!"
"I am maimed for ever. Help, ho! Murder! Murder!",I’ll be crippled forever! Help! Murder! murder!
The voice of Cassio. Iago keeps his word.,That’s Cassio’s voice. Iago has kept his word.
"Oh, villain that I am!","Oh, what a villain I am!"
It is even so.,That’s the truth.
"Oh, help, ho! Light! A surgeon!",Help me! Get some light! Get me a surgeon!
"'Tis he. Oh, brave Iago, honest and just, That hast such noble sense of thy friend’s wrong!","It’s him! Brave Iago, how honest and trustworthy you are! You even went as far as murder to help your friend in his misfortune. You teach me how I should act."
"Thou teachest me. Minion, your dear lies dead, For, of my heart, those charms, thine eyes, are blotted. Thy bed, lust-stained, shall with lust’s blood be spotted.","Whore, your lover’s dead now, and you’ll be going to hell soon. I’m coming, slut! I’ve shut the memory of your beautiful eyes out of my heart. You’ve already stained our sheets with your lust; now I’ll stain them with your whore’s blood."
"What, ho! No watch? No passage? Murder! Murder!",Help! Isn’t there a guard around? No one passing by? Murder! Murder!
"'Tis some mischance, the cry is very direful.","Something’s wrong, the man sounds panicked."
"Oh, help!","Oh, help!"
Hark!,Listen!
"Oh, wretched villain!",I’ve acted like such a villain!
"Two or three groan. 'Tis heavy night, These may be counterfeits. Let’s think ’t unsafe","Two or three men are groaning. But it’s dark out, and it could be a trap. It’s not safe to go near them till we get more help."
Nobody come? Then shall I bleed to death.,Nobody’s coming? I’ll bleed to death.
Hark!,Look!
"Here’s one comes in his shirt, with light and weapons.","Here’s someone coming in his pajamas, with a candle and weapons."
Who’s there? Whose noise is this that ones on murder?,Who’s there? Who’s shouting “murder”?
We do not know.,We don’t know.
Do not you hear a cry?,Didn’t you hear someone shouting?
"Here, here! For heaven’s sake, help me!","I’m here, here! For heaven’s sake, help me!"
What’s the matter?,What’s the matter?
"(to LODOVICO) This is Othello’s ancient, as I take it.","(to LODOVICO) That’s Othello’s ensign, I think."
"The same indeed, a very valiant fellow.",It is. He’s a good man.
(to CASSIO) What are you here that cry so grievously?,(to CASSIO) Who’s shouting so loudly?
Give me some help.,"Is that you, Iago? I’m here, I’ve been destroyed by villains! Help me."
"Oh, me, lieutenant! What villains have done this?","Oh, lieutenant! What villains did this to you?"
"I think that one of them is hereabout, And cannot make away.",I think one of them is nearby and can’t get away.
"Oh, treacherous villains!— What are you there? Come in, and give some help.",The treacherous criminals!—(to LODOVICO and GRATIANO) Who’s there? Come here and help!
"Oh, help me there!",Somebody help me over here!
That’s one of them.,That’s one of them.
O murd'rous slave! O villain!,(to RODERIGO) Murderer! Villain!
O damned Iago! O inhuman dog!,Damned Iago! You inhuman dog!
How silent is this town!—Ho! murder! murder!— What may you be? Are you of good or evil?,"Killing men in the dark? Where are these murderers? This is such a quiet, sleepy town!—Murder, murder!—Who’s that coming? Are you good or evil?"
"As you shall prove us, praise us.",Judge for yourself.
Signior Lodovico?,Signor Lodovico?
"He, sir.",That’s me.
I cry you mercy. Here’s Cassio hurt by villains.,I beg your pardon. Cassio’s been wounded.
Cassio!,Cassio!
"How is ’t, brother!","How are you doing, brother?"
My leg is cut in two.,My leg’s been cut in two.
"Light, gentlemen, I’ll bind it with my shirt.","God forbid! Bring me some light, gentlemen, I’ll bind the wound with my shirt."
"What is the matter, ho? Who is ’t that cried?",What’s the matter? Who’s shouting?
Who is ’t that cried?,Who’s shouting?
"Oh, my dear Cassio! My sweet Cassio! O Cassio, Cassio, Cassio!","Oh, my dear Cassio! My sweet Cassio! Oh, Cassio, Cassio, Cassio!"
Who they should be that have thus mangled you?,"You notorious whore! Cassio, do you know who might have stabbed you like this?"
No.,No.
I am sorry to find you thus. I have been to seek you.,I’m sorry to find you like this. I’ve been looking all over for you.
"Lend me a garter. So.—Oh, for a chair,","Lend me your sash—Oh, if we only had a stretcher to carry him out of here!"
"Alas, he faints! O Cassio, Cassio, Cassio!","He’s fainted! Oh Cassio, Cassio, Cassio!"
"Gentlemen all, I do suspect this trash To be a party in this injury.— Patience awhile, good Cassio.—Come, come, Alas, my friend and my dear countryman Roderigo! No—yes, sure! Yes, ’tis Roderigo.","Sir, I believe this piece of trash, Bianca, has something to do with all this trouble.—Hang in there, Cassio.—Come here, bring the light. Do you recognize this face? Oh, no, it’s my friend and countryman, Roderigo.—Yes, it’s Roderigo!"
"What, of Venice?","What, Roderigo from Venice?"
"Even he, sir. Did you know him?","That’s the one, sir. Do you know him?"
Know him? Ay.,Know him? Yes.
"Signior Gratiano? I cry you gentle pardon, These bloody accidents must excuse my manners That so neglected you.","Signor Gratiano, I beg your pardon. I didn’t mean to ignore you—it’s just because of this bloody uproar."
I am glad to see you.,I’m glad to see you.
"How do you, Cassio?—Oh, a chair, a chair!","How are you doing, Cassio?—Someone bring me a stretcher!"
Roderigo!,Roderigo!
"He, he, ’tis he.","It’s him, it’s him."
"Oh, that’s well said—the chair! Some good man bear him carefully from hence. I’ll fetch the general’s surgeon.—(to BIANCA) For you, mistress, Save you your labor.—He that lies slain here, Cassio,","Good—here’s the stretcher. Get somebody strong to carry him out of here. I’ll get the general’s surgeon. (to BIANCA) As for you, ma'am, don’t bother. The man lying here was my dear friend, Roderigo.—What was the problem between you?"
"None in the world, nor do I know the man.",There wasn’t any problem. I don’t even know him.
"(to BIANCA) What, look you pale?—Oh, bear him out o' the air.—","(to BIANCA) You’re pale?—Get Cassio out of here.—You look awfully pale, Bianca."
"Do you perceive the gastness of her eye?—Stay you, good gentlemen.—Look you pale, mistress?— Behold her well. I pray you, look upon her. Do you see, gentlemen? Nay, guiltiness Will speak, though tongues were out of use.","Do you see how afraid she is? Watch her, we’ll get the whole story. Keep an eye on her. Do you see? The guilty speak volumes even when they’re silent."
"Alas, what is the matter? What is the matter, husband?","What’s the matter? What’s the matter, husband?"
"By Roderigo and fellows that are ’scaped. He’s almost slain, and Roderigo dead.","Cassio was attacked here in the dark by Roderigo and men who escaped. He’s near death, and Roderigo’s dead already."
"Alas, good gentleman! Alas, good Cassio!","Oh, no, good gentleman! Oh no, good Cassio!"
"This is the fruits of whoring. Prithee, Emilia, (to BIANCA) What, do you shake at that?","This is what happens when you visit whores. Please, Emilia, ask Cassio where he was at dinner tonight.—(to BIANCA) What, does that make you nervous?"
"He supped at my house, but I therefore shake not.","He ate at my house, but that doesn’t make me nervous."
"Oh, did he so? I charge you, go with me.","Oh, did he? I order you to come with me."
"Oh, fie upon thee, strumpet!","Go to hell, you whore!"
As you that thus abuse me.,I’m no whore. I’m as moral as you are.
As I! Fie upon thee!,As moral as me! Damn you!
"Kind gentlemen, let’s go see poor Cassio dressed.— Come, mistress, you must tell ’s another tale. Emilia, run you to the citadel Will you go on afore? (aside) This is the night That either makes me or fordoes me quite.","Gentlemen, let’s go make sure Cassio’s wounds are properly dressed.—Come on, ma'am, you can tell us another story. Emilia, go to the castle and tell Othello and Desdemona what happened.—Will you please go now? (to himself) This is the night that’ll either make me or break me."
"It is the cause, it is the cause, my soul. Let me not name it to you, you chaste stars, It is the cause. Yet I’ll not shed her blood, Nor scar that whiter skin of hers than snow Yet she must die, else she’ll betray more men. Put out the light, and then put out the light. If I quench thee, thou flaming minister, I can again thy former light restore Thou cunning’st pattern of excelling nature, I know not where is that Promethean heat That can thy light relume. When I have plucked thy rose I cannot give it vital growth again, Oh, balmy breath, that dost almost persuade Justice to break her sword! One more, one more. Be thus when thou art dead and I will kill thee And love thee after. (kissing her) One more, and that’s the last. But they are cruel tears. This sorrow’s heavenly, It strikes where it doth love. She wakes.","I have to do it, I have to do it. I have to keep my reason in mind. I won’t say out loud what my reason is, but I have to do it. But I won’t shed any of her blood or scar that beautiful skin, whiter than snow and smooth as the finest marble. But she’s got to die, or she’ll cheat on other men. Put out the light of the candle, and then put out the light of her heart. If I extinguish the candle, I can light it again if I regret it. But once I kill you, you beautiful, fake woman, I do not know the magic that could bring you back. When I’ve plucked this rose, I can’t make it grow again; it will have no choice but to wither and die. Let me smell you while you’re still on the tree. (he kisses her) Oh, that sweet breath almost convinces me not to kill you and carry out justice. One more, one more kiss. If you’re this beautiful when you’re dead, I’ll kill you and then love you afterward. (kissing her) One more, and this is the last. Such a sweet kiss was never so deadly. I have to cry, but I have to be cruel too. I’m acting like God in the Old Testament—I have to punish the one I love. She’s waking up."
Who’s there? Othello?,Who’s there? Othello?
"Ay, Desdemona.","Yes, Desdemona."
"Will you come to bed, my lord?","Will you come to bed, my lord?"
"Have you prayed tonight, Desdemon?","Have you said your prayers tonight, Desdemona?"
"Ay, my lord.","Yes, my lord."
"If you bethink yourself of any crime Unreconciled as yet to heaven and grace,","If you can think of any crime you haven’t confessed, then pray for forgiveness right away."
"Alack, my lord, what do you mean by that?","Oh, my lord, what do you mean by that?"
"Well, do it, and be brief. I will walk by. I would not kill thy unpreparèd spirit. No, heavens forfend, I would not kill thy soul!","Well, hurry up and confess. Be quick about it. I’ll wait over here. I don’t want to kill you before you’ve readied your soul. No, I don’t want to send your soul to hell when I kill you."
Talk you of killing?,You’re talking about killing?
"Ay, I do.","Yes, I am."
Then heaven Have mercy on me!,Then heaven have mercy on me.
"Amen, with all my heart.","Amen to that, from the bottom of my heart."
"If you say, I hope you will not kill me.","If you really feel that way, then I hope you won’t kill me."
Humh!,Hmmph!
"When your eyes roll so. Why I should fear I know not, Since guiltiness I know not. But yet I feel I fear.","You’re scaring me. You terrify me when you have that look in your eyes. I don’t know why I should be afraid, since I haven’t done anything wrong. But I’m still afraid."
Think on thy sins.,Think of your sins.
They are loves I bear to you.,My only sin was loving you too much.
"Ay, and for that thou diest.","Yes, that’s why you have to die."
"That death’s unnatural that kills for loving. Alas, why gnaw you so your nether lip? Some bloody passion shakes your very frame. These are portents, but yet I hope, I hope","You’re wrong to kill me for loving you. Why are you chewing on your lower lip like that? You’re shaking with emotion. These are bad omens, but I hope, I hope, they don’t predict my future."
"Peace, and be still.",Quiet. Stay still.
I will so. What’s the matter?,I will. What’s this all about?
"That handkerchief Which I so loved and gave thee, thou gav’st To Cassio.","You gave that handkerchief, the one I loved and gave to you, to Cassio."
Send for the man and ask him.,"No, I swear by my life and soul! Bring him here and ask him."
"Sweet soul, take heed, take heed of perjury. Thou art on thy deathbed.","My sweet darling, don’t lie. You’re on your deathbed."
Ay—but not yet to die!,I am? But I’m not dying yet!
"Therefore confess thee freely of thy sin, For to deny each article with oath Cannot remove nor choke the strong conception That I do groan withal. Thou art to die.","Yes, right now. So confess your sin freely now. Even if you swear you’re innocent of every accusation, you won’t change my mind or remove the thought that’s tormenting me. You’re going to die."
"Oh, heaven have mercy on me!",Then heaven have mercy on me!
I say “amen.”,Amen to that.
"And have you mercy too! I never did Offend you in my life, never loved Cassio But with such general warranty of heaven As I might love. I never gave him token.","And you have mercy on me too! I never did anything wrong to you in my life. I never loved Cassio, except with the pure love that I feel for humankind. I never gave him any token of romantic love."
"O perjured woman, thou dost stone my heart, And mak’st me call what I intend to do A murder, which I thought a sacrifice! I saw the handkerchief.","I saw him holding the handkerchief! You liar, you’re turning my heart to stone, and making me call what I’ll do murder, when I had been thinking of it as a sacrifice! I saw the handkerchief."
"He found it then, Let him confess a truth.","He found it somewhere, then. I never gave it to him. Tell him to come here. He’ll tell the truth."
He hath confessed.,He’s already done so.
"What, my lord?","What, my lord?"
That he hath usèd thee.,That he had sex with you.
How? Unlawfully?,What? Had sex with me?
Ay.,Yes.
He will not say so.,He wouldn’t say that.
"No, his mouth is stopped. Honest Iago Hath ta'en order for ’t.",No. He won’t say anything anymore. Honest Iago’s arranged that.
"Oh! My fear interprets. What, is he dead?","Oh, I’m scared. What, is he dead?"
Had all his hairs been lives,"If he had as many lives as he’s got hairs on his head, I would’ve killed them all in revenge."
"Alas, he is betrayed and I undone.","Oh, he’s been betrayed, and I’ve been ruined."
"Out, strumpet! weep’st thou for him to my face?","What, you whore, are you crying for him right in front of me?"
"Oh, banish me, my lord, but kill me not!","Send me away, my lord, but don’t kill me!"
"Down, strumpet!","Down Othello probably wrestles her down. Down , whore!"
Kill me tomorrow—let me live tonight!,Kill me tomorrow—but let me live tonight.
"Nay, if you strive—","No, if you struggle with me—"
But half an hour!,Just half an hour!
"Being done, there is no pause.","While I’m doing this, I can’t pause for a moment."
But while I say one prayer!,Just let me say one prayer!
It is too late. (he smothers her),It’s too late. (he smothers her)
"(within) My lord , my lord! What, ho! My lord, my lord!","(offstage) My lord, my lord! Hello! My lord, my lord!"
"What noise is this?—Not dead? Not yet quite dead? I that am cruel am yet merciful, I would not have thee linger in thy pain.","What’s that noise? Aren’t you dead yet? I know I’m cruel, but I’m merciful too. I don’t want you to linger in pain."
"(within) What, ho! My lord, my lord!","(offstage) Hello! My lord, my lord!"
Who’s there?,Who’s there?
"(within) O good my lord, I would speak a word with you!","(offstage) Oh my lord, I need to speak to you!"
"Yes, ’tis Emilia.—(to EMILIA) By and by.—She’s dead.— 'Tis like she comes to speak of Cassio’s death, Still as the grave. Shall she come in? Were ’t good? I think she stirs again—No. What’s best to do? If she come in, she’ll sure speak to my wife— My wife! my wife! what wife? I have no wife. Methinks it should be now a huge eclipse Of sun and moon, and that th' affrighted globe Should yawn at alteration.","Yes, it’s Emilia.(to EMILIA)—Just a minute!—She’s dead now.—Emilia’s probably come to tell me that Cassio’s been killed. The fight outside was loud. So! You’re not moving anymore? No, you’re as still as a grave. Should I let her in? Is that a good idea? I think she’s moving again—No. What should I do? If she comes in, she’ll try to speak to my wife. My wife, my wife! What wife? I don’t have a wife. Oh, this is unbearable! Oh, the horror! There should be a huge eclipse of the sun and the moon, now that Desdemona’s no longer on this earth."
(within) I do beseech you,"(offstage) Please, my lord. I need to speak with you. Oh, my good lord!"
"I had forgot thee—Oh, come in, Emilia. Soft, by and by. Let me the curtains draw. Where art thou?","I’d forgotten about you—Emilia, wait a moment, let me draw the curtains. (closes the bed curtains) Where are you? (unlocks the door)"
What’s the matter with thee now?,What’s the matter with you now?
"O my good lord, yonder’s foul murders done!","Oh, my lord, terrible murders have been committed over there!"
"What, now?",What? Just now?
"But now, my lord.","Yes, just now, my lord."
"It is the very error of the moon, She comes more nearer earth than she was wont And makes men mad.",It’s because of the full moon. It comes too close to the earth and drives men crazy.
Called Roderigo.,Cassio’s killed a young Venetian named Roderigo.
Roderigo killed? And Cassio killed!,Roderigo’s been killed? And Cassio’s killed?
"No, Cassio is not killed.","No, Cassio wasn’t killed."
"Not Cassio killed! Then murder’s out of tune, And sweet revenge grows harsh.","Cassio’s not dead? Then the wrong man is dead, and sweet revenge has gone wrong."
"Oh, falsely, falsely murdered!","Oh, I’ve been murdered unfairly!"
"Alas, what cry is that?","Oh Lord, who’s that crying?"
That? What?,That? What?
"Out and alas, that was my lady’s voice.","Oh, no, that was my lady’s voice."
"Help! Help, ho, help! O lady, speak again!","Help! Help! Oh, lady, speak again. Sweet Desdemona! Oh sweet mistress, speak!"
A guiltless death I die.,I’m dying an innocent woman.
"Oh, who hath done this deed?","Oh, who did this thing?"
"Nobody. I myself. Farewell. Commend me to my kind lord. Oh, farewell!","No one. I did it myself. Give my love to my kind husband. Oh, goodbye!"
"Why, how should she be murdered?","Why, how could she have been murdered?"
"Alas, who knows?","My God, who knows?"
You heard her say herself it was not I.,You heard her say it wasn’t me.
She said so. I must needs report the truth.,"Yes, she said that. I must go report what happened."
She’s like a liar gone to burning hell. 'Twas I that killed her.,She was lying even as she was going down to hell. I did kill her.
"Oh, the more angel she,","Then she was even more an angel, and you’re an even blacker devil!"
"She turned to folly, and she was a whore.","She cheated on me, and she was a whore."
"Thou dost belie her, and thou art a devil.","You slander her, you devil."
She was false as water.,"She was fickle and unfaithful, like water."
"Thou art rash as fire, To say that she was false. Oh, she was heavenly true!",You’ve lost your mind to accuse her of cheating. She was utterly true to you!
"Oh, I were damned beneath all depth in hell, But that I did proceed upon just grounds To this extremity. Thy husband knew it all.","Cassio had sex with her. Ask your husband if you doubt me. If I didn’t have a good reason to do this, damn me to the very bottom of hell. Your husband knew about everything."
My husband!,My husband!
Thy husband.,Your husband.
That she was false to wedlock?,He said she was unfaithful?
"If heaven would make me such another world Of one entire and perfect chrysolite, I’d not have sold her for it.","Yes, with Cassio. If she’d been faithful to me, I never would have given her up, not even if God himself offered me a jewel as big as a planet in exchange for her."
My husband?,My husband.
"Ay, ’twas he that told me on her first. That sticks on filthy deeds.","Yes, he’s the one who first told me about her. He’s an honest man who detests evil actions."
My husband!,My husband?
"What needs this iterance, woman? I say thy husband.","Why do you keep repeating that, woman? I’m telling you, your husband."
"O mistress, villainy hath made mocks with love! My husband say that she was false!","Oh, my mistress, a villain has made a mockery of your love! My husband said she was unfaithful!"
"He, woman. My friend, thy husband, honest, honest Iago.","Yes, him, woman. I said “your husband.”—Do you understand that word? My friend, your husband, the honest, honest Iago."
"If he say so, may his pernicious soul Rot half a grain a day! He lies to th' heart. She was too fond of her most filthy bargain.","If he said that, then I hope his malicious soul rots in hell forever. He’s lying through his teeth! She was too attached to her filthy marriage ever to do a thing like that!"
Ha!,Ha!
Do thy worst. This deed of thine is no more worthy heaven Than thou wast worthy her.,"Go ahead, do your worst. Killing me won’t send you to heaven. You weren’t good enough for her."
"Peace, you were best.",You’d better shut up!
"Thou hast not half that power to do me harm As ignorant as dirt! Thou hast done a deed— I care not for thy sword, I’ll make thee known","I can endure far more pain than you could ever give me! Oh, you idiot! You stupid fool! As dumb as dirt! You’ve committed a terrible evil—I’m not afraid of your sword. I’ll tell everyone what you did, even if it"
"Though I lost twenty lives.—Help! Help, ho! Help! The Moor hath killed my mistress! Murder, murder!","costs me my life twenty times over.—Help, help, help! The Moor’s killed my mistress! Murder, murder!"
"What is the matter? How now, general?","What’s the matter? What’s going on here, general?"
"Oh, are you come, Iago? You have done well, That men must lay their murders on your neck.","Oh, are you here, Iago? You’ve done a good job, that other men can attribute their murders to you!"
What is the matter?,What’s the matter?
"(to IAGO) Disprove this villain, if thou be’st a man. I know thou didst not, thou'rt not such a villain. Speak, for my heart is full.","(to IAGO) Tell this villain he’s wrong, if you’re man enough. He says you told him his wife cheated on him. I know you didn’t. You’re not that much of a villain. Speak, because I’m too emotional to say any more."
"I told him what I thought, and told no more Than what he found himself was apt and true.",I told him what I thought. I didn’t tell him anything that didn’t make sense or ring true to him.
But did you ever tell him she was false?,But did you tell him she cheated on him?
I did.,I did.
"You told a lie, an odious, damnèd lie. Upon my soul, a lie, a wicked lie. She false with Cassio! Did you say with Cassio?","Then you told a lie, a sick, wicked lie. I swear on my soul it was a lie. You said she slept with Cassio. Did you say Cassio?"
"With Cassio, mistress. Go to, charm your tongue.","Yes, with Cassio. Now be quiet."
"I will not charm my tongue, I am bound to speak. My mistress here lies murdered in her bed—",I will not be quiet! I have to speak. My mistress here lies murdered in her bed—
"Oh, heavens forfend!","No, heaven forbid!"
And your reports have set the murder on.,And your lies caused this murder.
"Nay, stare not, masters, it is true, indeed.","Don’t stand there gaping, everyone. It’s true."
'Tis a strange truth.,"It may be true, but it’s unbelievable."
"Oh, monstrous act!","Oh, what a horrible deed!"
"Villainy, villainy, villainy! I think upon ’t, I think I smell ’t, Oh, villainy! I thought so then, I’ll kill myself for grief.","Evil, evil, evil! I can smell it! I suspected it earlier. I’ll kill myself out of grief! Oh, evil, evil!"
"What, are you mad? I charge you, get you home.","Are you crazy? I’m ordering you, go home."
"Good gentlemen, let me have leave to speak. 'Tis proper I obey him, but not now. Perchance, Iago, I will ne'er go home.","Good gentlemen, give me permission to speak. I know I ought to obey my husband, but not now. Maybe I’ll never go home again, Iago!"
Oh! Oh! Oh!,Oh! Oh! Oh!
"Nay, lay thee down and roar, For thou hast killed the sweetest innocent That e'er did lift up eye.","Yes, go ahead and moan, because you killed the sweetest, most innocent woman who ever lived!"
"Oh, she was foul!— I scarce did know you, uncle. There lies your niece, Whose breath, indeed, these hands have newly stopped.","She was filthy! I barely knew you, Uncle Gratiano Gratiano is Brabantio’s brother and Desdemona’s uncle. Gratiano . Here’s your niece lying here dead. I killed her with these hands. I know this looks horrible."
"Poor Desdemon! I am glad thy father’s dead, Thy match was mortal to him, and pure grief Shore his old thread in twain. Did he live now,","Poor Desdemona! I’m glad your father isn’t alive to see this. Your marriage made him die of grief before his time. If he was alive now, this sight would hurt"
"This sight would make him do a desperate turn, And fall to reprobation.",him terribly. It would make him curse the heavens and be damned to hell.
"'Tis pitiful, but yet Iago knows That she with Cassio hath the act of shame A thousand times committed. Cassio confessed it, With that recognizance and pledge of love Which I first gave her. I saw it in his hand, It was a handkerchief, an antique token My father gave my mother.","It’s sad, but Iago knows she had sex with Cassio a thousand times. Cassio confessed it, and she pledged her love to him by giving him the handkerchief I’d given her. I saw it in his hand. It was an old memento that my father gave to my mother."
"Oh, heaven! Oh, heavenly powers!","Oh, God! Dear God in heaven!"
"Zounds, hold your peace.","Damn it, shut your mouth."
"'Twill out, ’twill out.—I peace? No, I will speak as liberal as the north. Let heaven and men and devils, let them all, All, all cry shame against me, yet I’ll speak.","No, the truth will come out—Me, shut my mouth? Let heaven and men and devils tell me to shut me up. I’ll say what I have to say."
"Be wise, and get you home.","If you’re smart, you’ll go home."
I will not.,I won’t.
Fie! Your sword upon a woman?,Shame on you! Drawing your sword on a woman?
O thou dull Moor! That handkerchief thou speak’st of I found by fortune and did give my husband. More than indeed belonged to such a trifle— He begged of me to steal it.,"Oh, you stupid Moor! I found that handkerchief by accident and gave it to my husband. He’d begged me to steal it many times."
Villainous whore!,You evil whore!
"She give it Cassio? No, alas, I found it And I did give ’t my husband.","You think she gave it to Cassio? No, I found it and gave it to my husband."
"Filth, thou liest!","You piece of filth, you’re lying!"
(to OTHELLO) O murderous coxcomb! What should such a fool Do with so good a wife?,"I swear I’m not lying. (to OTHELLO) Oh, you murderous fool! How did you ever get such a good wife?"
Are there no stones in heaven But what serve for the thunder?—Precious villain!,Won’t heaven strike this Iago dead? You absolute villain!
The woman falls! Sure he hath killed his wife.,The woman’s falling down! He’s killed his wife!
"Ay, ay. Oh, lay me by my mistress' side.","Yes, yes! Lay me next to my mistress."
"He’s gone, but his wife’s killed.","He’s gone, and his wife’s dead."
"'Tis a notorious villain. Take you this weapon, Which I have recovered from the Moor. But kill him rather. I’ll after that same villain, For ’tis a damnèd slave.","He’s a wicked, horrible criminal. Take the Moor’s sword and guard the door from the outside. Kill him rather than let him leave this room. I’m going after Iago. He’s a horrid criminal."
"I am not valiant neither, But ever puny whipster gets my sword. But why should honor outlive honesty?","I’m not that strong, if a puny nobody can grab my sword. But why should my reputation for honor last longer than my honor did? Let it all go."
"What did thy song bode, lady? Hark, canst thou hear me? I will play the swan. And die in music. (singing)  Willow, willow, willow— Moor, she was chaste, she loved thee, cruel Moor. So come my soul to bliss, as I speak true.","What did your song mean, lady? Can you hear me? I’ll die like a swan. They sing when they die. (singing) Willow, willow, willow.— Moor, she never cheated on you. She loved you, you cruel man. I swear on my soul I’m telling the truth, and as I say this, I die."
"I have another weapon in this chamber, It was a sword of Spain, the ice-brook’s temper. Oh, here it is. Uncle, I must come forth.","I’ve got another weapon in the room. It’s a Spanish sword, hardened in ice cold water and razor sharp. Here it is. Uncle, I’m coming out!"
"(within) If thou attempt it, it will cost thee dear.","(offstage) If you try that, you’ll pay for it. You’ve got no weapon, so you’ll have to suffer."
"Look in upon me then and speak with me, Or, naked as I am, I will assault thee.","Look in on me, and talk with me, or I’ll attack even without a weapon."
What is the matter?,What’s the matter?
"Behold, I have a weapon. A better never did itself sustain","Look, I have a weapon, the best sword a soldier could have. I’ve fought my way through obstacles twenty times more terrifying than you with this weapon. But"
"That with this little arm and this good sword I have made my way through more impediments Than twenty times your stop. But, oh, vain boast! Who can control his fate? ’tis not so now. Here is my journey’s end, here is my butt, And very sea-mark of my utmost sail. Do you go back dismayed? ’tis a lost fear. Man but a rush against Othello’s breast, Now, how dost thou look now? O ill-starred wench, Pale as thy smock! When we shall meet at compt This look of thine will hurl my soul from heaven And fiends will snatch at it. Cold, cold, my girl, Whip me, ye devils, From the possession of this heavenly sight! Blow me about in winds, roast me in sulfur, Wash me in steep-down gulfs of liquid fire!—","who can control his fate? I’m not like that now. Don’t be afraid, even though you see me with a weapon. This is the end of my journey, the end of my life. Are you backing away in fear? There’s no reason to be afraid. You could tap me with a feather and I’d back away. Where would Othello go?—Oh, look at you! Such cruel luck! You’re as pale as your nightgown! When we meet on Judgment Day, that look of yours will send me from heaven to hell, where devils will grab me. You’re cold, cold, and you were never hot with lust. Oh you damned villain! Whip me, you devils, so I don’t have to look at this heavenly sight! Blow on me with hot winds, roast me in lava, drown me in liquid fire! Oh, Desdemona! Dead Desdemona! Oh, oh!"
Where is this rash and most unfortunate man?,Where is that poor rash man?
That’s he that was Othello. Here I am.,You mean the man who used to be Othello? Here I am.
Where is that viper? Bring the villain forth.,Where’s that snake? Bring the villain forward.
"I look down towards his feet, but that’s a fable.","I’m looking to see if you have cloven hooves like the devil. But that’s just a fairy tale. If you are a devil, I won’t be able to kill you."
Wrench his sword from him.,Take his sword away from him.
"I bleed, sir, but not killed.","I’m bleeding, but you didn’t kill me."
"I am not sorry neither. I’d have thee live, For in my sense ’tis happiness to die.","I’m not sorry, either. I want you to live, since to me, death is happiness."
"O thou Othello, thou was once so good, What shall be said to thee?","Oh Othello, you were once so good, then you were tricked by this villain. What can I say to you?"
"Why, anything. An honorable murderer, if you will, For naught I did in hate, but all in honor.","Say anything. Call me an honorable murderer if you like. I did nothing out of hate, only out of honor."
This wretch hath part confessed his villainy.,This poor guy’s partly confessed his plan. Did you plan Cassio’s death with him?
Ay.,Yes.
"Dear general, I never gave you cause.","Dear general, I never gave you any reason to hate me."
"I do believe it, and I ask your pardon. Will you, I pray, demand that demi-devil","I believe you, and I ask you to forgive me. Will you please make this half-devil say why he tricked me and damned my soul?"
"Demand me nothing. What you know, you know. From this time forth I never will speak word.","Don’t ask me anything. You know what you know. From this moment on, I’ll never say another word."
"What, not to pray?","What, not even to pray?"
Torments will ope your lips.,Torture will make you talk.
"Well, thou dost best.","Well, do your best."
"Sir, you shall understand what hath befall'n, Which, as I think, you know not. Here is a letter Found in the pocket of the slain Roderigo, And here another. The one of them imports By Roderigo.","Sir, you’ll understand everything that has happened. I don’t think you know now. Here is a letter we found in Roderigo’s pocket. And here’s another. This one talks about how Roderigo should kill Cassio."
"Oh, villain!","Oh, you villain!"
Most heathenish and most gross!,Ungodly and monstrous!
"Now here’s another discontented paper Roderigo meant to have sent this damnèd villain But that, belike, Iago in the interim Came in and satisfied him.","Here’s another letter from his pocket, addressed to Iago and full of complaints. We think he was going to send it to Iago, but then Iago stepped in and answered his complaints by killing him."
O thou pernicious caitiff! That was my wife’s?,"Oh, you wicked scoundrel! Cassio, how did you get my wife’s handkerchief?"
"I found it in my chamber, And he himself confessed but even now That there he dropped it for a special purpose Which wrought to his desire.","I found it in my room, and Iago just confessed that he put it there for his own purposes."
O fool! fool! fool!,"Oh, what a fool I am!"
"How he upbraids Iago, that he made him Brave me upon the watch, whereon it came That I was cast. And even but now he spake, After long seeming dead—Iago hurt him,","Also, in his letter to Iago, Roderigo criticizes Iago for telling him to get me angry while I was on guard duty, and get me demoted. And just now he admitted it, even though he’d seemed to be dead for a long while—Iago tricked him, Iago urged him to do it."
"(to OTHELLO) You must forsake this room and go with us. Your power and your command is taken off And Cassio rules in Cyprus. For this slave, If there be any cunning cruelty It shall be his. You shall close prisoner rest Till that the nature of your fault be known To the Venetian state.—Come, bring him away.","(to OTHELLO) You’ll have to leave this room and come with us. You’re stripped of your power and your command, and Cassio will govern Cyprus. As for this slave, Iago, if we can think of any torture that will hurt him a lot but keep him alive a long time, he’ll have it. You’ll remain a prisoner until we bring your crimes to the Venetian government.—Okay, take him away."
"Soft you, a word or two before you go. No more of that. I pray you, in your letters, When you shall these unlucky deeds relate, Speak of me as I am. Nothing extenuate, Nor set down aught in malice. Then must you speak Of one not easily jealous, but being wrought, Perplexed in the extreme. Of one whose hand, Like the base Indian, threw a pearl away Richer than all his tribe. Of one whose subdued eyes, Drop tears as fast as the Arabian trees Their medicinal gum. Set you down this,","Wait. A word or two before you go. I’ve given the state of Venice a bit of help in the past, and they know it. But enough about that. When you record these sad events in your letters, please describe me exactly as I am. Don’t tone things down or exaggerate them out of hostility. If you’re being fair, you’ll have to describe me as someone who loved too much, but who wasn’t wise about it. I was not easily made jealous, but once I was tricked and manipulated, I worked myself into a frenzy. Describe me as a fool who threw away a precious pearl with his own hands, like a silly Indian who didn’t know what it was worth. As someone who was not emotional, but who then cried a lot. Write all this"
"And say besides that in Aleppo once, Where a malignant and a turbaned Turk I took by the throat the circumcisèd dog, And smote him, thus.","down, and then say also that in Aleppo I once saw a Turk beating a Venetian, so I grabbed the Turk by the throat and hit him like this."
"Oh, bloody period!","Oh, what a bloody end to all this!"
All that is spoke is marred.,Everything we’ve heard is bad.
"I kissed thee ere I killed thee. No way but this, Killing myself, to die upon a kiss.","(to DESDEMONA) I kissed you before I killed you. Now, killing myself, I’m dying while I kiss you again."
"This did I fear, but thought he had no weapon, For he was great of heart.","I was afraid this would happen, because he was a noble, brave man, but I didn’t think he had a weapon."
"O Spartan dog, More fell than anguish, hunger, or the sea, Look on the tragic loading of this bed. This is thy work. The object poisons sight, Let it be hid.—Gratiano, keep the house For they succeed on you.—To you, lord governor, Remains the censure of this hellish villain: The time, the place, the torture. Oh, enforce it! Myself will straight aboard, and to the state","(to IAGO) You bloodthirsty dog, you’re crueler than sadness or hunger, crueler than the sea. Look at these dead people on this bed. You did all this. He makes me sick. Take him away. Gratiano, take care of the house, and take the Moor’s property. You’ve inherited everything.—(to CASSIO) Governor, I leave it in your hands to punish this evil villain: just decide the time, the place and the means of torture. And then carry it out! I have to go back to Venice, and tell them about these sad events."
