"Now is the winter of our discontent Made glorious summer by this son of York, And all the clouds that loured upon our house In the deep bosom of the ocean buried. Our bruisèd arms hung up for monuments, Our stern alarums changed to merry meetings, Our dreadful marches to delightful measures. Grim-visaged war hath smoothed his wrinkled front; To fright the souls of fearful adversaries, He capers nimbly in a lady’s chamber To the lascivious pleasing of a lute. But I, that am not shaped for sportive tricks, I, that am rudely stamped and want love’s majesty To strut before a wanton ambling nymph; I, that am curtailed of this fair proportion, Cheated of feature by dissembling nature, Into this breathing world, scarce half made up, And that so lamely and unfashionable That dogs bark at me as I halt by them— Why, I, in this weak piping time of peace, Unless to see my shadow in the sun And descant on mine own deformity.","Now all of my family’s troubles have come to a glorious end, thanks to my brother, King Edward IV. All the clouds that threatened the York family have vanished and turned to sunshine. Now we wear the wreaths of victory on our heads. We’ve taken off our armor and weapons and hung them up as decorations. Instead of hearing trumpets call us to battle, we dance at parties. We get to wear easy smiles on our faces rather than the grim expressions of war. Instead of charging toward our enemies on armored horses, we dance for our ladies in their chambers, accompanied by sexy songs on the lute. But I’m not made to be a seducer, or to make faces at myself in the mirror. I was badly made and don’t have the looks to strut my stuff in front of pretty sluts. I’ve been cheated of a nice body and face, or even normal proportions. I am deformed, spit out from my mother’s womb prematurely and so badly formed that dogs bark at me as I limp by them. I’m left with nothing to do in this weak, idle peacetime, unless I want to look at my lumpy shadow in the sun and sing about that."
"And therefore, since I cannot prove a lover To entertain these fair well-spoken days, And hate the idle pleasures of these days. Plots have I laid, inductions dangerous, By drunken prophecies, libels and dreams, To set my brother Clarence and the king And if King Edward be as true and just As I am subtle, false, and treacherous, This day should Clarence closely be mewed up About a prophecy which says that “G” Dive, thoughts, down to my soul. Here Clarence comes.","Since I can’t amuse myself by being a lover, I’ve decided to become a villain. I’ve set dangerous plans in motion, using lies, drunken prophecies, and stories about dreams to set my brother Clarence and the king against each other. If King Edward is as honest and fair-minded as I am deceitful and cruel, then Clarence is going to be locked away in prison today because of a prophecy that “G” Edward interprets “G” to mean George, Duke of Clarence, though ironically it could just as well mean Richard, Duke of Gloucester. “G” will murder Edward’s children. Oh, time to hide what I’m thinking—here comes Clarence."
"Brother, good day. What means this armèd guard That waits upon your Grace?","Good afternoon, brother. Why are you surrounded by these armed guards?"
"His majesty, Tend'ring my person’s safety, hath appointed","His majesty is so concerned about my personal safety that he has ordered them to conduct me to the Tower The Tower of London, where political prisoners were kept. Tower ."
Upon what cause?,You’re being arrested? Why?
Because my name is George.,Because my name is George.
"Alack, my lord, that fault is none of yours. He should, for that, commit your godfathers. O, belike his majesty hath some intent But what’s the matter, Clarence? May I know?","That’s not your fault! He should imprison the person who named you, instead. Maybe the king is sending you to the Tower to have you renamed. But, really, what’s going on, Clarence? Can you tell me?"
"Yea, Richard, when I know, for I protest As yet I do not. But, as I can learn, He hearkens after prophecies and dreams, And says a wizard told him that by “G” His issue disinherited should be. And for my name of George begins with G, It follows in his thought that I am he. Have moved his Highness to commit me now.","I’ll tell you as soon as I know, Richard, because at this point I have no idea. All I’ve been able to find out is that our brother the king has been listening to prophecies and dreams. He picked out the letter “G” from the alphabet and said a wizard told him that “G” will take the throne away from his children. He thinks “G” is me. I’ve learned that this, along with other frivolous reasons like it, is what prompted the king to send me to prison."
"Why, this it is when men are ruled by women. 'Tis not the king that sends you to the Tower. My Lady Grey his wife, Clarence, ’tis she Was it not she and that good man of worship, Anthony Woodeville, her brother there, That made him send Lord Hastings to the Tower, From whence this present day he is delivered?","Well, this is what happens when men let themselves be ruled by women. The king isn’t the one sending you to the Tower, Clarence. It’s his wife, Lady Grey, who got him to do this. Remember how she and her brother, Anthony Woodeville, made him send Lord Hastings to the Tower? Hastings was just released. We’re not safe, Clarence, we’re not safe."
"By heaven, I think there is no man is secure But the queen’s kindred and night-walking heralds That trudge betwixt the king and Mistress Shore. Heard ye not what an humble suppliant","By God, I think the only people who are safe are the queen’s own relatives and the late-night messengers the king uses to fetch his mistress, Mistress Shore. Did you hear how Lord Hastings had to beg the queen to be freed?"
"Humbly complaining to her deity Got my Lord Chamberlain his liberty. I’ll tell you what: I think it is our way, If we will keep in favor with the king, The jealous o'erworn widow and herself, Since that our brother dubbed them gentlewomen, Are mighty gossips in this monarchy.","Hastings got his freedom by bowing down to that goddess. And I’ll tell you what. If we want to stay in the king’s good graces, we’re going have to act like the mistress’s Richard implies that Mistress Shore and the queen did not belong to the rank of gentry. mistress’s servants, too. Ever since our brother made them gentlewomen, Mistress Shore and the queen have become mighty busybodies in our kingdom."
"I beseech your Graces both to pardon me. That no man shall have private conference, Of what degree soever, with his brother.","I beg your pardon, my lords, but the king gave me orders that no one, however high in rank, should speak privately to Clarence."
"Even so. An please your Worship, Brakenbury, You may partake of anything we say. Is wise and virtuous, and his noble queen Well struck in years, fair, and not jealous. We say that Shore’s wife hath a pretty foot, A cherry lip, a bonny eye, a passing pleasing tongue, How say you, sir? Can you deny all this?","All right. If you like, Brakenbury, you can listen to anything we say. We’re not saying anything treasonous, man. We say the king is wise and good, and his noble queen is getting old, pretty, and not jealous. And that Mr. Shore’s wife has nice feet, cherry lips, pretty eyes, and a very pleasant way of expressing herself. And, finally, that the queen’s relatives have all been elevated in rank. What do you think? Is there anything inaccurate in that?"
"With this, my lord, myself have naught to do.","I have nothing to do with what you’re talking about, my lord."
"Naught to do with Mistress Shore? I tell thee, fellow, He that doth naught with her, excepting one,","“Nothing to do” with Mrs. Shore! I tell you, mister, there’s only one man who gets to do “nothing,” To do “nothing,” or “naught,” meant to have sex. Richard is playing off Brakenbury’s innocent, frightened remark. “nothing,” with her and not be punished for it. Everyone else had better keep their “nothings” to themselves."
"What one, my lord?","Who is that, my lord?"
"Her husband, knave. Wouldst thou betray me?","Her husband, you rascal. Are you going to get me in trouble?"
"I do beseech your Grace to pardon me, and withal Forbear your conference with the noble duke.","I beg your Grace “Grace” is a title of address for nobility and royalty and might apply to a king, queen, duke, duchess, or archbishop. Grace to pardon me, and now please stop talking to Clarence."
"We know thy charge, Brakenbury, and will obey.","We know you have a job to do, Brakenbury, and we’ll do what you say."
"We are the queen’s abjects and must obey.— Brother, farewell. I will unto the king, And whatsoe'er you will employ me in, Were it to call King Edward’s widow “sister,” Meantime, this deep disgrace in brotherhood Touches me deeper than you can imagine.","We are required to serve the queen, and we must obey her. Farewell, brother. I will go to the king and do whatever you want me to, even if it’s to call my brother’s wife “sister,” in order to set you free. But just so you know, I am very angry about how our own brother has treated you, angrier than you can imagine."
I know it pleaseth neither of us well.,"It doesn’t make either of us happy, I know."
"Well, your imprisonment shall not be long. Meantime, have patience.","Well, your imprisonment won’t last long. I will either get you out, lying if I have to, or stay in prison in your place. In the meantime, be patient."
I must perforce. Farewell.,I have no choice. Goodbye.
"Go tread the path that thou shalt ne'er return. Simple, plain Clarence, I do love thee so If heaven will take the present at our hands. But who comes here? The new-delivered Hastings?","Go walk the path that you will never return from. Dumb, honest Clarence. I love you so much that I’ll send your soul to heaven very soon—if heaven will accept anything from me, that is. But who’s coming? The newly released Hastings?"
Good time of day unto my gracious lord.,"Good afternoon, my dear lord!"
As much unto my good Lord Chamberlain. How hath your lordship brooked imprisonment?,"The same to you, my lord! Welcome to the open air again. How did you tolerate prison?"
"With patience, noble lord, as prisoners must. But I shall live, my lord, to give them thanks That were the cause of my imprisonment.","With patience, noble lord, as prisoners must. But I will live to thank those who sent me there."
For they that were your enemies are his And have prevailed as much on him as you.,"No doubt, no doubt. And so will Clarence, for your enemies are his enemies, and they have gotten the upper hand of him as well as of you."
More pity that the eagle should be mewed While kites and buzzards prey at liberty.,It’s a shame that we eagles are caged up while the vultures are free to do whatever they please.
What news abroad?,What’s the news abroad?
"No news so bad abroad as this at home: The king is sickly, weak and melancholy, And his physicians fear him mightily.","No news as bad as the news at home: The king is sickly, weak, and depressed, and his doctors are very afraid he’s going to die"
"Now, by Saint Paul, that news is bad indeed. And overmuch consumed his royal person. 'Tis very grievous to be thought upon. Where is he, in his bed?","Now, by George, that really is terrible news. Oh, the king has abused his body with bad habits for a long time, and it’s finally taking its toll on him. Very sad. Where is he, in his bed?"
He is.,He is.
"Go you before, and I will follow you.","You go ahead, and I will follow you."
"He cannot live, I hope, and must not die Till George be packed with post-horse up to heaven. I’ll in to urge his hatred more to Clarence With lies well steeled with weighty arguments, Clarence hath not another day to live; Which done, God take King Edward to His mercy, And leave the world for me to bustle in. For then I’ll marry Warwick’s youngest daughter. The readiest way to make the wench amends Is to become her husband and her father; The which will I, not all so much for love As for another secret close intent But yet I run before my horse to market. Clarence still breathes; Edward still lives and reigns. When they are gone, then must I count my gains.","The king won’t live, I hope. But he’d better not die till Clarence is sent packing to heaven. I’ll go see the king and, with carefully argued lies, get him to hate Clarence even more than he already does. If my plan succeeds, Clarence doesn’t have another day to live. Then God’s free to send King Edward to heaven, too, and leave me the world to run around in! I’ll marry the earl of Warwick’s youngest daughter, Lady Anne. So what if I killed her husband and her father? The best way to make up for the girl’s losses is to become what she’s lost: a husband and a father. So that’s what I’ll do, not because I love her but because I’ll get something out of it. But I’m running ahead of myself. Clarence is still alive; Edward is not only alive, he’s king. Only when they’re dead can I start to count my gains."
"Set down, set down your honorable load, If honor may be shrouded in a hearse, Whilst I awhile obsequiously lament Th' untimely fall of virtuous Lancaster.","Set down your honorable load, men, if there is ever any honor in being dead. I want to mourn the cruel death of this good man. Look at the noble king’s poor cold body—the measly remains of the Lancaster family."
"Pale ashes of the house of Lancaster, Thou bloodless remnant of that royal blood, Be it lawful that I invocate thy ghost To hear the lamentations of poor Anne, Stabbed by the selfsame hand that made these wounds. Lo, in these windows that let forth thy life I pour the helpless balm of my poor eyes. O, cursèd be the hand that made these holes; Cursèd the blood that let this blood from hence. More direful hap betide that hated wretch That makes us wretched by the death of thee Than I can wish to wolves, to spiders, toads, If ever he have child, abortive be it, Prodigious, and untimely brought to light, Whose ugly and unnatural aspect May fright the hopeful mother at the view,","His royal blood has drained right out of him. I hope I can talk to your ghost, Henry, without breaking church laws. I want you to hear my sorrow. My husband Anne’s husband was Prince Edward, King Henry’s son and a Lancaster. husband was murdered by the same man who stabbed you. My tears now fall into the holes where your life leaked out. I curse the man who made these holes. I curse the man’s heart who had the heart to stab you. And I curse the man’s blood who shed your blood. I want the man who made me suffer by killing you to face a more terrible end than I could wish on spiders, toads, and all the poisonous, venomous things things alive. If he ever has a child, let it be born prematurely, and let it look like a monster—so ugly and unnatural that the sight of it frightens its own mother."
"If ever he have wife, let her be made More miserable by the death of him Than I am made by my poor lord and thee.— Come now towards Chertsey with your holy load,","And if he ever has a wife, let her be more miserable when he dies than I am now. Guards, let’s continue on to Chertsey monastery, carrying this holy burden you picked up at St. Paul’s monastery."
"And still, as you are weary of this weight, Rest you, whiles I lament King Henry’s corse.","When it gets too heavy, rest, and I’ll lament over King Henry’s corpse some more."
"Stay, you that bear the corse, and set it down.","Halt, corpse bearers, and put down your load."
What black magician conjures up this fiend,What wicked magician has conjured up this devil to interrupt this sacred burial rite?
"Villains, set down the corse or, by Saint Paul, I’ll make a corse of him that disobeys.","Villains, set down the corpse, or I’ll make a corpse of you."
"My lord, stand back and let the coffin pass.","My lord, stand back and let the coffin pass."
"Unmannered dog, stand thou when I command!— Or by Saint Paul I’ll strike thee to my foot And spurn upon thee, beggar, for thy boldness.","Rude dog! Stop when I command you to! And put up your weapon so it’s not pointing at my chest, or I’ll strike you to the ground and trample on you, you beggar, for being so bold."
"(to gentlemen and halberds) What, do you tremble? Are you all afraid? And mortal eyes cannot endure the devil.— Avaunt, thou dreadful minister of hell. Thou hadst but power over his mortal body; His soul thou canst not have. Therefore begone.","(to the gentlemen and guards) What, are you trembling? You’re all afraid of him? Well, I can’t blame you. You’re only human, after all, and mortals can’t stand to look at the devil. (to RICHARD) Begone, you dreadful servant of hell. You only had power over my father-in-law’s body; you can’t have his soul. So get out."
"Sweet saint, for charity, be not so curst.","Sweet saint, for goodness’s sake, don’t be so angry."
"Foul devil, for God’s sake, hence, and trouble us not, For thou hast made the happy earth thy hell, Filled it with cursing cries and deep exclaims. If thou delight to view thy heinous deeds,","Ugly devil, for God’s sake, get out of here and leave us alone. You have made the happy world into your hell, filling it with cursing cries and lamentations. If you enjoy looking at your awful deeds, take a look at this noteworthy example of your butcheries."
"O, gentlemen, see, see dead Henry’s wounds Open their congealed mouths and bleed afresh!— Blush, blush, thou lump of foul deformity, For ’tis thy presence that exhales this blood Thy deeds, inhuman and unnatural, Provokes this deluge most unnatural.— O God, which this blood mad’st, revenge his death! O earth, which this blood drink’st revenge his death! Or earth gape open wide and eat him quick, As thou dost swallow up this good king’s blood, Which his hell-governed arm hath butcherèd!","Oh, gentlemen, look, look! Dead Henry’s wounds have opened up and are bleeding again! —Shame on you, you deformed lump. It’s your presence that draws out this blood from his empty veins. Your inhuman and unnatural actions have provoked this unnatural flood of blood. Oh God, who made this blood, revenge his death! Oh earth, which soaks up this blood, revenge his death! Either let heaven send lightning to strike the murderer dead or let the earth open wide and devour him, as it does this good king’s blood."
"Lady, you know no rules of charity,","Dear woman, you don’t know the rules of charity. When faced with bad, you’re supposed to turn it into good, and when subject to curses, you’re supposed to convert them into blessings."
"Villain, thou know’st not law of God nor man. No beast so fierce but knows some touch of pity.","Villain, you don’t know the laws of God or of man. Even the fiercest wild animal has some touch of pity."
"But I know none, and therefore am no beast.","If I know nothing about pity, that must mean I’m not an animal."
"O, wonderful, when devils tell the truth!",It’s amazing to hear a devil speak the truth!
"Vouchsafe, divine perfection of a woman, Of these supposèd crimes to give me leave By circumstance but to acquit myself.","It’s even stranger when an angel is so angry. Divine, perfect woman, give me a chance to prove in detail that I’m innocent of the evils you accuse me of."
"Vouchsafe, defused infection of a man, By circumstance to curse thy cursèd self.","Contagious infection of humanity, give me a chance to condemn you for the evils I know you’ve committed."
"Fairer than tongue can name thee, let me have Some patient leisure to excuse myself.","You who are beautiful beyond words, calm down and let me explain myself."
"Fouler than heart can think thee, thou canst make","You who are wicked beyond belief, the only “explanation” I’ll accept from you is for you to hang yourself."
By such despair I should accuse myself.,Such an expression of despair would only prove that I was guilty.
And by despairing shalt thou stand excused For doing worthy vengeance on thyself That didst unworthy slaughter upon others.,"Maybe, but if you killed yourself, it would also show that you felt some guilt for killing others."
Say that I slew them not.,Let’s say I didn’t kill them.
"Then say they were not slain. But dead they are, and devilish slave, by thee.","Then you might as well say they’re not dead. But they are dead, and you killed them, you slave of the devil."
I did not kill your husband.,I did not kill your husband.
"Why then, he is alive.","Well, then he must be alive."
"Nay, he is dead, and slain by Edward’s hands.","No, he is dead. Edward killed him."
"In thy foul throat thou liest. Queen Margaret saw Thy murd'rous falchion smoking in his blood, The which thou once didst bend against her breast, But that thy brothers beat aside the point.",You’re lying. Queen Margaret saw your sword steaming with his blood. It was the same sword you almost killed her with—and you would have killed her if my brothers hadn’t fought you off.
That laid their guilt upon my guiltless shoulders.,"She provoked me with her lying mouth, accusing me of crimes I didn’t commit."
"Thou wast provokèd by thy bloody mind, That never dream’st on aught but butcheries. Didst thou not kill this king?","No, what provoked you was your own bloody mind, which never thinks about anything but butchering. You killed this king, didn’t you?"
I grant you.,"Yes, I’ll grant you that."
"Dost grant me, hedgehog? Then, God grant me too Thou mayst be damnèd for that wicked deed. O, he was gentle, mild, and virtuous.","You’ll grant me, you hedgehog? Then let God grant me that you’ll be damned for that wicked deed. Oh, he was gentle, mild, and virtuous."
The better for the King of heaven that hath him.,"That will please God, who has him now."
"He is in heaven, where thou shalt never come.","He is in heaven, where you will never go."
"Let him thank me, that holp to send him thither, For he was fitter for that place than earth.","Let him thank me, who helped him get there. He’s better suited to be there than here."
And thou unfit for any place but hell.,And you’re not suited for any place except hell.
"Yes, one place else, if you will hear me name it.","Yes, and one other place, if you’ll only let me name it."
Some dungeon.,Some dungeon.
Your bedchamber.,Your bedroom.
Ill rest betide the chamber where thou liest!,There is no rest to be had in any bedroom where you are!
"So will it, madam till I lie with you.","Exactly, madam, until I sleep with you."
I hope so.,I hope Anne assumes that she’s never going to sleep with him. hope you’re right.
"I know so. But, gentle Lady Anne, And fall something into a slower method— Is not the causer of the timeless deaths Of these Plantagenets, Henry and Edward, As blameful as the executioner?","I know I am. But, gentle Lady Anne, let’s stop this rapid-fire argument and move more slowly. Isn’t the person who caused the untimely deaths of these two Plantagenets Plantagenet was the name of the royal family that ruled England from the twelfth to the fifteenth centuries. Both the Lancasters, the family to which Lady Anne’s husband and father-in-law belonged, and the Yorks, the family to which Richard and his brothers belong, are descended from the Plantagenets. Plantagenets , Henry and Edward, as much to blame as the person who actually executed the murders?"
Thou wast the cause and most accursed effect.,You’re both those people—responsible for both cause and effect.
"Your beauty was the cause of that effect— Your beauty, that did haunt me in my sleep To undertake the death of all the world, So I might live one hour in your sweet bosom.",Your beauty caused what I did. It haunted me in my sleep. I would have killed the whole world just to be able spend one hour next to you.
These nails should rend that beauty from my cheeks.,"If I believed you, murderer, I would take my nails and scratch that beauty right off my cheeks."
"These eyes could never endure that beauty’s wrack. You should not blemish it, if I stood by. As all the world is cheerèd by the sun,","I couldn’t stand to see you destroy your beauty; you won’t touch it as long as I’m standing next to you. Just as everyone becomes cheerful from the sun, I’m cheered up by your looks. They are my daylight, my life."
"Black night o'ershade thy day, and death thy life.","Then I hope night shadows your day, and death takes your life!"
"Curse not thyself, fair creature; thou art both.","Don’t damn yourself. You, fair lady, are both my day and my life."
"I would I were, to be revenged on thee.","I wish I were, so I could deprive you of both day and life."
It is a quarrel most unnatural,It’s strange that you want to take revenge on the person who loves you.
It is a quarrel just and reasonable To be revenged on him that killed my husband.,It’s just and reasonable that I want to take revenge on the person who killed my husband.
"He that bereft thee, lady, of thy husband Did it to help thee to a better husband.","The man who killed your husband, dear lady, only did it to help you get a better husband."
His better doth not breathe upon the earth.,There is no better one on earth.
He lives that loves thee better than he could.,Wrong. There is a man who loves you better than your husband could.
Name him.,Name him.
Plantagenet.,Plantagenet.
"Why, that was he.","Yes, that’s my husband’s name."
"The selfsame name, but one of better nature.","Someone else has the same name, but he’s a better man."
Where is he?,Where is this man?
Here.,Here.
Why dost thou spit at me?,Why do you spit at me?
Would it were mortal poison for thy sake.,If only I could spit poison.
Never came poison from so sweet a place.,Poison never came from such a sweet place.
Never hung poison on a fouler toad. Out of my sight! Thou dost infect mine eyes.,Poison never landed on such an ugly toad. Get out of my sight! You’re poisoning my eyes.
"Thine eyes, sweet lady, have infected mine.","Your beautiful eyes, sweet lady, have infected mine with love."
Would they were basilisks to strike thee dead.,"I wish my eyes were basilisks Basilisks were mythical creatures whose glances killed the people they landed on. basilisks , so they could strike you dead!"
"I would they were, that I might die at once, For now they kill me with a living death. Those eyes of thine from mine have drawn salt tears, Shamed their aspect with store of childish drops. No, when my father York and Edward wept To hear the piteous moan that Rutland made When black-faced Clifford shook his sword at him; Nor when thy warlike father, like a child, And twenty times made pause to sob and weep, That all the standers-by had wet their cheeks Like trees bedashed with rain—in that sad time, My manly eyes did scorn an humble tear; Thy beauty hath, and made them blind with weeping. I never sued to friend, nor enemy; My tongue could never learn sweet smoothing word. But now thy beauty is proposed my fee,","I wish they were, so that I could die right now, because, at this point, I live a living death. Your eyes have made me cry, shamefully, like a child. I never cried before this. I didn’t cry when my father, York, and my brother Edward both wept at the death of my brother Rutland, whom Clifford slaughtered. And when your warrior-father recounted the sad story of my father’s death, pausing to sob twenty times in the course of the story so that all the bystanders ended up dripping tears like trees in a rainstorm—even then, I refused to cry. But your beauty has made me cry until I couldn’t see. I never tried to win over a friend or enemy with sweet words. I’m too proud for that. But if your beauty is the reward for sweet talk, I’ll talk."
"Teach not thy lip such scorn, for it were made For kissing, lady, not for such contempt. If thy revengeful heart cannot forgive, Lo, here I lend thee this sharp-pointed sword, And let the soul forth that adoreth thee, I lay it naked to the deadly stroke And humbly beg the death upon my knee.","Don’t curl your lips in scorn. They were made for kissing, not for contempt. If your vengeful heart can’t forgive me, here—take my sword and bury it in my heart so that my soul, which adores you, can be free. I open myself to being stabbed. In fact, I beg for death on my knees."
"Nay, do not pause; for I did kill King Henry— Nay, now dispatch; ’twas I that stabbed young Edward— But ’twas thy heavenly face that set me on.","No, don’t pause, because I did kill King Henry, though it was your beauty that made me do it. Go ahead. And it was me who stabbed young Edward, though it was your heavenly face that set me to work."
"Take up the sword again, or take up me.","Take up the sword again, or take me up."
"Arise, dissembler. Though I wish thy death,","Get up, liar. Though I wish you were dead, I’m not going to be the one to kill you."
"(rising) Then bid me kill myself, and I will do it.","(rising) Then tell me to kill myself, and I will."
I have already.,I have already.
"That was in thy rage. Speak it again and, even with the word, This hand, which for thy love did kill thy love, To both their deaths shalt thou be accessory.","You said it when you were furious. Say it again—just one word, and my hand, which killed your lover out of love, will kill your far truer lover. You will be an accessory to both crimes."
I would I knew thy heart.,I wish I knew what was in your heart.
'Tis figured in my tongue.,I’ve told you.
I fear me both are false.,I fear that your words and your heart are both false.
Then never man was man true.,Then no man has ever been honest.
"Well, well, put up your sword.","Well, then, put your sword away."
Say then my peace is made.,Tell me that you’ll accept my love.
That shall you know hereafter.,You’ll know about that later.
But shall I live in hope?,But can I have some hope?
All men I hope live so.,I’d like to think all men have some hope.
Vouchsafe to wear this ring.,Please wear this ring.
To take is not to give.,"I’ll take the ring, but don’t assume I’m giving you anything in return."
"Look, how this ring encompasseth finger; Even so thy breast encloseth my poor heart. And if thy poor devoted servant may But beg one favor at thy gracious hand, Thou dost confirm his happiness forever.","See how my ring encircles your finger? That’s how your heart embraces my poor heart. Wear both the ring and my heart, because both are yours. And if I, your poor devoted servant, may ask you for one small favor, you will guarantee my happiness forever."
What is it?,What’s that?
"To him that hath more cause to be a mourner, And presently repair to Crosby House, Where, after I have solemnly interred At Chertsey monast'ry this noble king I will with all expedient duty see you. For divers unknown reasons, I beseech you, Grant me this boon.","Please leave it to me to take care of the burial, as I have more reason to mourn than you do. Meanwhile go to my estate at Crosby Place. After I have performed the solemn burial rites for this noble king at Chertsey monastery and cried with regret at his grave, I’ll hurry to meet you. For various reasons that must remain secret, please do this for me."
"With all my heart, and much it joys me too Tressel and Berkeley, go along with me.","I’ll do it with all my heart. I’m happy to see you’ve come to repent for what you’ve done. Tressel and Berkeley, come with me."
Bid me farewell.,Say goodbye to me.
"'Tis more than you deserve; But since you teach me how to flatter you,","It’s more than you deserve. But since you’re already teaching me how to flatter you, pretend I’ve said goodbye already."
"Sirs, take up the corse.","Sirs, take up the corpse."
"Towards Chertsey, noble lord?","Toward Chertsey, noble lord?"
"No, to Whitefriars. There attend my coming.","No, to the Whitefriars monastery. Wait for me there."
"Was ever woman in this humor wooed? I’ll have her, but I will not keep her long. What, I that killed her husband and his father, To take her in her heart’s extremest hate, With curses in her mouth, tears in her eyes, Having God, her conscience, and these bars against me, And I no friends to back my suit at all But the plain devil and dissembling looks? And yet to win her, all the world to nothing! Hath she forgot already that brave prince, Edward, her lord, whom I some three months since Stabbed in my angry mood at Tewkesbury? A sweeter and a Lovellier gentleman, Young, valiant, wise, and, no doubt, right royal, The spacious world cannot again afford.","Has anyone ever courted a woman in this state of mind? And has anyone ever won her, as I’ve done? I’ll get her, but I won’t keep her long. What! I, who killed her husband and his father, managed to win her over when her hatred for me was strongest, while she’s swearing her head off, sobbing her eyes out, and the bloody corpse, proof of why she should hate me, right in front of her? She has God, her conscience, and my own acts against me, and I have nothing on my side but the ugly devil and my false looks. And yet, against all odds, I win her over! Ha! Has she already forgotten her brave husband, Prince Edward, whom I stabbed on the battlefield three months ago in my anger? The world will never again produce such a sweet, lovely gentleman. He was graced with lots of natural gifts, he was young, valiant, wise, and no doubt meant to be king."
"And will she yet abase her eyes on me, That cropped the golden prime of this sweet prince On me, whose all not equals Edward’s moiety? On me, that halts and am misshapen thus? My dukedom to a beggarly denier, I do mistake my person all this while! Myself to be a marv'lous proper man. I’ll be at charges for a looking glass And entertain a score or two of tailors To study fashions to adorn my body. I will maintain it with some little cost. But first I’ll turn yon fellow in his grave And then return lamenting to my love. Shine out, fair sun, till I have bought a glass,","And yet she cheapens herself by turning her gaze on me, who cut her sweet prince’s life short and made her a widow? On me, though I am barely half the man that Edward was? On me, though I am limping and deformed? I bet I’ve been wrong about myself all this time. Even though I don’t see it, this lady thinks I’m a marvelously good-looking man. Time to buy myself a mirror and employ a few dozen tailors to dress me up in the current fashions. Since I’m suddenly all the rage, it will be worth the cost. But first, I’ll dump this fellow in his grave, then return to my love weeping with grief. Come out, beautiful sun—until I’ve bought a mirror to admire my reflection in, I’ll watch my shadow as I stroll along."
"Have patience, madam. There’s no doubt his majesty Will soon recover his accustomed health.","Be patient, madam. I’m sure his majesty will recover his health soon."
"In that you brook it ill, it makes him worse. Therefore, for God’s sake, entertain good comfort","You’ll only make him worse with all your worry. For God’s sake, let people comfort you. Then you’ll be able to cheer him up."
"If he were dead, what would betide on me?","If he were dead, what would happen to me?"
No other harm but loss of such a lord.,Nothing more than that you’d lose your husband.
The loss of such a lord includes all harms.,Losing this husband will cause me all sorts of harm.
The heavens have blessed you with a goodly son,"You have been blessed with an excellent son, who will comfort you when the king is dead."
"Ah, he is young, and his minority Is put unto the trust of Richard Gloucester, A man that loves not me nor none of you.","But he’s young, and as long as he’s too young to become king, Richard, the duke of Gloucester, has power over him. Richard loves neither me nor any of you."
Is it concluded that he shall be Protector?,Has it been decided that Richard will be Protector A “Protector” acted for a king until he was old enough to rule on his own. Protector ?
But so it must be if the king miscarry.,"It’s been decided, though not yet officially announced. But that’s what will happen if the king dies."
"Here comes the lord of Buckingham, and Derby.",Here come Lord Buckingham and Lord Derby.
(to QUEEN ELIZABETH) Good time of day unto your royal Grace.,"(to QUEEN ELIZABETH) Good afternoon, your royal Highness!"
"God make your Majesty joyful, as you have been.","I hope God makes you happy again, like you once were."
"The countess Richmond, good my lord of Derby, To your good prayer will scarcely say amen. Yet, Derby, notwithstanding she’s your wife And loves not me, be you, good lord, assured","My good Lord Derby, the countess Richmond would hardly say “amen” Before the Countess of Richmond was Stanley’s wife, she was married to Edmund Tudor. She is the mother of the earl of Richmond, the future Henry VII, who will prove to be an important character later in this play. “amen” to your kind words. But don’t worry. I don’t hold it against you, even though she’s your wife, that she’s so unfriendly and arrogant."
"I do beseech you either not believe The envious slanders of her false accusers, Or if she be accused in true report, Bear with her weakness, which I think proceeds","Please don’t believe the false rumors you’ve heard about her feelings toward you, or if they’re true, then forgive her, since she’s only acting that way because she’s sick, not because she hates you."
"Saw you the king today, my lord of Derby?","Did you see the king today, Lord Derby?"
But now the duke of Buckingham and I Are come from visiting his majesty.,"Yes, the duke of Buckingham and I have just returned from visiting him."
"What likelihood of his amendment, lords?","What are the chances of his getting better, lords?"
"Madam, good hope. His grace speaks cheerfully.","Madam, keep up hope. He seems cheerful."
God grant him health. Did you confer with him?,God give him health. Did you talk with him?
"Ay, madam. He desires to make atonement Betwixt the duke of Gloucester and your brothers, And betwixt them and my Lord Chamberlain,","Yes, madam. He wants to patch things up between Richard and your brothers, and between your brothers and Hastings. He has summoned them all."
Would all were well—but that will never be. I fear our happiness is at the height.,I wish I could believe you that all was well! But I’m worried that things can only go downhill from here.
"They do me wrong, and I will not endure it! Who is it that complains unto the king By holy Paul, they love his grace but lightly That fill his ears with such dissentious rumors. Because I cannot flatter and look fair, Smile in men’s faces, smooth, deceive and cog, I must be held a rancorous enemy. Cannot a plain man live and think no harm, But thus his simple truth must be abused With silken, sly, insinuating jacks?","They’re out to get me, and I won’t stand for it! Which of you has been complaining to the king that I don’t like them? By God, whoever is worrying the king with these lies doesn’t love him very much. Just because I don’t know how to flatter and act nice, to smile in men’s faces and, as soon as their backs are turned, spread rumors about them, to bow and scrape like a nobleman trained in the French court, people have to think I’m their enemy. Can’t a plain man live and do no harm to anyone without being taken advantage of by a bunch of slick, sneaky lowlifes?"
To whom in all this presence speaks your Grace?,Which of us are you referring to?
"To thee, that hast nor honesty nor grace. When have I injured thee? When done thee wrong?— Or thee?—Or thee? Or any of your faction? A plague upon you all! His royal grace, Cannot be quiet scarce a breathing while But you must trouble him with lewd complaints.","You, who are neither honest nor good. When did I ever do you any harm? Or you? Or you? Or any of you? Damn you all! The king—whom I hope God will protect better than you would like—can’t get a minute’s rest without you bothering him with your outrageous complaints."
"Brother of Gloucester, you mistake the matter. The king, on his own royal disposition, Aiming belike at your interior hatred That in your outward actions shows itself Against my children, brothers, and myself, Makes him to send, that he may learn the ground.","Brother, you’ve made a mistake. The king himself noticed your hatred toward my children, my brothers, and myself. No one had to point it out to him—it’s obvious. He asked people to visit him. He wanted to find out the reason for your ill will, so he could do something about it."
"That wrens make prey where eagles dare not perch. Since every jack became a gentleman, There’s many a gentle person made a jack.","I can’t tell what’s going on. The world has become so bad that now little wrens have settled where eagles used to roost. Since every peasant has been made into a nobleman, many noblemen have been dragged down to the level of peasants."
"Come, come, we know your meaning, brother Gloucester. God grant we never may have need of you.","Come, come, I know what you’re referring to, Richard. You resent my friends' rise in society, and my own. Let’s hope we never need your help for anything."
"Meantime God grants that we have need of you. Our brother is imprisoned by your means, Myself disgraced, and the nobility Are daily given to ennoble those That scarce some two days since were worth a noble.","Meanwhile, we’re the ones who need you. My brother is imprisoned because of you, I am disgraced, and the nobility are held in contempt while those who two days ago weren’t worth a dime have suddenly been promoted."
"By Him that raised me to this careful height From that contented hap which I enjoyed, Against the duke of Clarence, but have been An earnest advocate to plead for him. My lord, you do me shameful injury Falsely to draw me in these vile suspects.","By the Lord who raised me to this weighty post from the happy and carefree life I used to enjoy, I promise you I never did anything to get the king to turn against the duke of Clarence. In fact, I’ve always been on his side and have pleaded for him. My lord, you’re doing me a huge injustice to suggest otherwise."
Of my Lord Hastings' late imprisonment.,"Oh, and I’ll bet you’ll also deny you were responsible for Lord Hastings’s recent stay in prison."
"She may, my lord, for—","She may deny that, my lord, because—"
"She may, Lord Rivers. Why, who knows not so? She may do more, sir, than denying that. And then deny her aiding hand therein, And lay those honors on your high desert. What may she not? She may, ay, marry, may she—","She may, Lord Rivers? Everybody knows she may. She may do a lot more than that, sir. She may help you to get many nice promotions, and then deny she helped you, claiming you won them on your own merits. What can’t she do? She could even—"
"What, marry, may she?",She could even what?
"A bachelor, a handsome stripling too. I wis, your grandam had a worser match.","She could even what? She could marry a king, a bachelor, a handsome young lad. Certainly, your grandmother had a worse match."
"My Lord of Gloucester, I have too long borne Your blunt upbraidings and your bitter scoffs. With those gross taunts that oft I have endured. I had rather be a country servant-maid Than a great queen with this condition, To be so baited, scorned, and stormèd at.","My lord of Gloucester, I have suffered your blunt upbraidings and your bitterness toward me for too long. By God, I will tell the king about these taunts. I would rather be a country serving maid than a great queen if it meant I could escape your scorn and constant harassment."
Small joy have I in being England’s queen.,I’ve had very little joy as England’s queen.
"(aside) And lessened be that small, God I beseech Him! Thy honor, state, and seat is due to me.","(speaking so no one else can hear) God, give her even less joy, I beg you! Elizabeth, your honor, your high rank, and your position as queen Queen Margaret is the widow of King Henry VI, who was deposed and murdered by the Yorkists. queen are all owed to me."
"(to QUEEN ELIZABETH) What, threat you me with telling of the king? Tell him, and spare not. Look, what I have said, I dare adventure to be sent to th' Tower. 'Tis time to speak. My pains are quite forgot.","(to QUEEN ELIZABETH) What! You’re threatening to tell the king? Go ahead, and don’t spare a single detail. Look, what I have said to you I will repeat in the presence of the king. If it means I’ll be sent to the Tower, so be it. It’s time for me to speak the truth. All the pains I took on King Edward’s behalf have been forgotten."
"(aside) Out, devil! I do remember them too well: Thou killed’st my husband Henry in the Tower,","(speaking so no one else can hear) You devil! I remember these pains all too well. You killed my husband, Henry, in the Tower and my poor son, Edward, at Tewksbury."
"(to QUEEN ELIZABETH) Ere you were queen, ay, or your husband king, I was a packhorse in his great affairs, A weeder-out of his proud adversaries, A liberal rewarder of his friends.","(to QUEEN ELIZABETH) Before you were queen—in fact, before your husband was king—I was a packhorse for his great affairs, a weeder-out of his proud enemies, a generous rewarder of his friends. In order to make his blood royal, I spent my own blood."
"(aside) Ay, and much better blood than his or thine.","(speaking so no one else can hear) Yes, and you spent better Margaret is referring to the deaths of her own husband and son. better blood than his or your own."
"(to QUEEN ELIZABETH) In all which time, you and your husband Grey Were factious for the house of Lancaster.— And, Rivers, so were you. —Was not your husband Let me put in your minds, if you forget, What you have been ere this, and what you are; Withal, what I have been, and what I am.","(to QUEEN ELIZABETH) In all that time, you and your first husband, Sir John Grey, were fighting for the Lancasters.—And so were you, Rivers.—Elizabeth, wasn’t your first husband killed while fighting in Queen Margaret’s army at Saint Alban’s? In case you’ve forgotten, I want to remind you where you come from and what side you were on before you arrived here. And I want you to remember whom I fought for, who I have been, and who I am."
"(aside) A murd'rous villain, and so still thou art.","(speaking so no one else can hear) You were a murderous villain, and you still are."
"Ay, and forswore himself—which Jesu pardon!—","(to ELIZABETH) Poor Clarence In Henry VI, Part , Clarence constantly shifted his loyalties from the Yorks (his own family) to th Lancasters, to which his father-inlaw belonged. Clarence abandoned his father-in-law, a Lancaster, and broke his own oath—may Jesus forgive him!—"
(aside) Which God revenge!,(speaking so no one else can hear) May God take revenge on him!
"To fight on Edward’s party for the crown; And for his meed, poor lord, he is mewed up. Or Edward’s soft and pitiful, like mine. I am too childish-foolish for this world.","(to QUEEN ELIZABETH) —in order to fight on Edward’s side to help him win the crown. And now he is rewarded by being thrown in prison! I wish to God my heart were made of stone, like Edward’s is. Or I wish Edward’s were soft and full of feeling, as mine is, so that he would let Clarence go. I am too childish, too innocent, for this world."
"(aside) Hie thee to hell for shame, and leave the world, Thou cacodemon! There thy kingdom is.","(speaking so no one else can hear) Hurry to hell, then, and leave the world alone, you demon! Hell is where your kingdom is."
"Which here you urge to prove us enemies, We followed then our lord, our sovereign king. So should we you, if you should be our king.","My Lord of Gloucester, in those busy days, which you’re bringing up now to prove we’re your enemies, we followed the lawful king. If you were king, we would do the same."
If I should be? I had rather be a peddler.,If I were king? I’d rather be a peddler. The thought of being king doesn’t appeal to me in the least.
"As little joy, my lord, as you suppose You should enjoy were you this country’s king, As little joy may you suppose in me That I enjoy, being the queen thereof.","You’re right to imagine that being this country’s leader brings no pleasure. As queen, I have felt none."
"For I am she, and altogether joyless. I can no longer hold me patient.","(speaking so no one else can hear) No pleasure for the queen, indeed: I am the real queen, and the experience is completely joyless. I can no longer hold my tongue."
"Hear me, you wrangling pirates, that fall out In sharing that which you have pilled from me! If not, that I am queen, you bow like subjects, Yet that, by you deposed, you quake like rebels.— Ah, gentle villain, do not turn away.","Hear me, you wrangling pirates. You’re quarreling over what doesn’t even belong to you—you stole it from me! Which of you does not tremble when you see me? If you aren’t trembling because you know I am queen and you are my subjects, then you’re shaking because you threw me from the throne! (to RICHARD) Oh highborn villain, do not turn away!"
"Foul, wrinkled witch, what mak’st thou in my sight?","Ugly, wrinkled witch, what are you doing here?"
That will I make before I let thee go.,Only describing what you have ruined. Or at least that’s what I plan to do before I let you go.
Wert thou not banishèd on pain of death?,Weren’t you banished on pain of death?
"I was, but I do find more pain in banishment Than death can yield me here by my abode. (to QUEEN ELIZABETH) And thou a kingdom; —all of you, allegiance. The sorrow that I have by right is yours, And all the pleasures you usurp are mine.","I was. But I felt more pain from exile than I would have from being dead here at home. You, Richard, owe me a husband and a son. The rest of you owe me a kingdom. And all of you owe me allegiance. The sorrow that I feel actually belongs to you, and the high life you enjoy actually belongs to me. You stole it from me."
"When thou didst crown his warlike brows with paper, And with thy scorns drew’st rivers from his eyes, And then, to dry them, gav’st the duke a clout Steeped in the faultless blood of pretty Rutland— Denounced against thee, are all fall'n upon thee, And God, not we, hath plagued thy bloody deed.","The curse my noble warrior-father Richard refers to events Shakespeare dramatizes in King Henry VI, Part (Act , Scene ). Queen Margaret has Richard’s father, the third duke of York, killed. But before she kills him, she sets a paper crown on his head to mock him and hands him a rag soaked in his son Rutland’s blood. He begs God to destroy her. warrior-father laid on you when you set a paper crown on his head just before slaying him has finally borne fruit. Your scorn for him was so shocking that he cried rivers. To stop up his tears, you handed him a rag soaked with the blood of his own child. God, not us, is responsible for punishing you for your bloody deed."
So just is God to right the innocent.,God is just. He rewards the innocent.
"O, ’twas the foulest deed to slay that babe,","Oh, killing that child was the dirtiest, most merciless deed there ever was!"
Tyrants themselves wept when it was reported.,Tyrants themselves wept when they heard about it.
No man but prophesied revenge for it.,Everyone understood there would be a heavy payback.
"Northumberland, then present, wept to see it.","Even Northumberland The earl of Northumberland was an enemy of Richard’s family, the House of York. Northumberland wept to see it."
"What, were you snarling all before I came, And turn you all your hatred now on me? Did York’s dread curse prevail so much with heaven That Henry’s death, my Lovelly Edward’s death, Their kingdom’s loss, my woeful banishment, Can curses pierce the clouds and enter heaven? Why then, give way, dull clouds, to my quick curses! Though not by war, by surfeit die your king, As ours by murder to make him a king.","What, were you all snarling before I arrived, ready to catch each other by the throat like dogs, but now that I’m here, you turn your hatred toward me? Did the duke of York’s terrible curse have so much weight with God that God repaid him not only with Henry’s death and my lovely Edward’s death but with the loss of their kingdom and with my banishment, too? All because of what happened to that brat Rutland? If curses can pierce the clouds and enter heaven that easily, then open up, thick clouds, and listen to my curses!"
"Edward thy son, that now is Prince of Wales, For Edward our son, that was Prince of Wales, Die in his youth by like untimely violence. Thyself a queen, for me that was a queen, Long mayst thou live to wail thy children’s death And see another, as I see thee now, Decked in thy rights, as thou art stalled in mine. Long die thy happy days before thy death, Die neither mother, wife, nor England’s queen.— Rivers and Dorset, you were standers-by, And so wast thou, Lord Hastings, when my son Was stabbed with bloody daggers. God I pray Him But by some unlooked accident cut off.","(to QUEEN ELIZABETH) Though your king did not die in battle, let him die from overindulging his appetites, as my husband was murdered to make your husband king. May your son Edward, who is currently the prince of Wales, die young and violently, as payback for the death of my son Edward, the former prince of Wales. And may you outlive your glory just as miserably as I have, to make up for taking my position as queen. May you live long enough to mourn your children’s deaths and watch another woman enjoy the throne, as I now watch you. Let your happy days die long before you do. After many extended hours of grief, may you die neither a mother, a wife, nor England’s queen. Rivers, Dorset, and Lord Hastings, you all stood by as my son was stabbed. For his sake, I pray to God that none of you die a natural death but have your lives cut short by some unforeseen accident."
"Have done thy charm, thou hateful, withered hag.","Enough of your magic spells, you hateful, withered hag."
"And leave out thee? Stay, dog, for thou shalt hear me. If heaven have any grievous plague in store O, let them keep it till thy sins be ripe And then hurl down their indignation On thee, the troubler of the poor world’s peace. The worm of conscience still begnaw thy soul. And take deep traitors for thy dearest friends. No sleep close up that deadly eye of thine, Unless it be while some tormenting dream Affrights thee with a hell of ugly devils.","And leave you out? Don’t move, dog. It’s your turn now. If heaven has any plagues beyond what I can drum up, let it wait until your sins Margaret wants Richard to die only after committing the maximum number of sins, so he can be guaranteed a greater punishment in Hell. sins are piled high and then hurl them down on you, you destroyer of a whole world of peace! May conscience eat away at your soul constantly. May you suspect your true friends of being traitors and take the worst traitors as your closest friends. May you never sleep a wink except to dream of a hell full of ugly devils."
"Thou that wast sealed in thy nativity The slave of nature and the son of hell, Thou slander of thy heavy mother’s womb, Thou loathèd issue of thy father’s loins,","You deformed, prematurely born, rooting hog, you evil birth defect, you insult to your mother’s womb, you hated disgrace to your father’s sperm, you disgusting—"
Margaret.,Margaret.
Richard!,Richard.
Ha?,Yes?
I call thee not.,I didn’t call you.
"I cry thee mercy, then, for I did think That thou hadst called me all these bitter names.",I beg your pardon—I thought it was me whom you were calling all those terrible names.
"O, let me make the period to my curse!","Yes, I was, but I don’t want an answer from you. Let me finish my curse."
"'Tis done by me, and ends in “Margaret.”","I’ve finished it for you, and it ends in “Margaret.”"
(to QUEEN MARGARET) Thus have you breathed your curse against yourself.,"He’s turned your curse against you, Margaret."
"Why strew’st thou sugar on that bottled spider, Whose deadly web ensnareth thee about? Fool, fool, thou whet’st a knife to kill thyself. The day will come that thou shalt wish for me","Poor imitation queen, why do you align yourself with this humpbacked spider when he’s got you trapped in his deadly web? Fool! You’re sharpening a knife to cut yourself. The day will come when you’ll wish I could help you cast spells against this poisonous, hunchbacked toad."
"False-boding woman, end thy frantic curse, Lest to thy harm thou move our patience.","Woman, stop your frantic curses and false prophesies before we run out of patience and do something bad to you."
"Foul shame upon you, you have all moved mine.",Shame on you; I’ve already run out of patience with you all.
"Were you well served, you would be taught your duty.","If you got what you deserved, you would learn some respect."
"Teach me to be your queen, and you my subjects. O, serve me well, and teach yourselves that duty!","What I deserve is that you treat me like a queen, and what you deserve is to act like my subjects. Give me what I deserve, and do your duty!"
(to RIVERS) Dispute not with her; she is lunatic.,(to RIVERS) Don’t argue with her. She’s crazy.
"Peace, Master Marquess, you are malapert. O, that your young nobility could judge What ’twere to lose it and be miserable! They that stand high have many blasts to shake them, And if they fall, they dash themselves to pieces.","Enough from you, mister, you’re being impertinent. Unlike those born into nobility, your claim to royalty is so recent that you hardly even know what it means to lose it. People in high positions are shaken by many blasts of wind, and when they fall, they shatter into pieces."
"Good counsel, marry. —Learn it, learn it, marquess.","Good advice, indeed. Take it to heart, Dorset."
"It touches you, my lord, as much as me.","It applies to you as much as to me, my lord."
"Ay, and much more; but I was born so high. Our aerie buildeth in the cedar’s top, And dallies with the wind and scorns the sun.","Yes, and much more so. But I was born that high. Like an eagle, which builds its nest at the top of a high tree, I play in the wind and am not afraid to look at the sun."
"Witness my son, now in the shade of death, Whose bright out-shining beams thy cloudy wrath Hath in eternal darkness folded up. Your aerie buildeth in our aerie’s nest. As it was won with blood, lost be it so.","But you turn that sun into a shadow. Take my son, for example. He is dead now. You put out his bright life forever. You are building your nest in our nest. Oh God who’s watching, don’t let him get away with this! He won his position violently. Let him lose it that way, too."
"Peace, peace, for shame, if not for charity.","Stop—if you can’t be kind, at least have some shame."
"Urge neither charity nor shame to me. (addressing the others) And shamefully my hopes by you are butchered. My charity is outrage, life my shame, And in that shame still live my sorrows' rage.","How dare you talk about kindness or shame. (to the others) You have only been unkind to me, and you have shamefully butchered my hopes. My kindness to you is to be outraged at what has happened, and my sad, sad shame is in what you have done to my life."
"Have done, have done.","Enough, enough."
"In sign of league and amity with thee. Now fair befall thee and thy noble house! Thy garments are not spotted with our blood, Nor thou within the compass of my curse.","Oh noble Buckingham, I’ll kiss your hand to show my friendship and support for you. I wish only good things upon you and your noble family! Your clothes aren’t spattered with my family’s blood, and you aren’t affected by my curse."
The lips of those that breathe them in the air.,"No one here is affected by your curse, because curses are just words with no power."
"I will not think but they ascend the sky, And there awake God’s gentle-sleeping peace. (aside to BUCKINGHAM) Look when he fawns, he bites; and when he bites, His venom tooth will rankle to the death. Have not to do with him. Beware of him. Sin, death, and hell have set their marks on him,","I think they rise up to heaven and arouse God from his gentle sleep. (so that only BUCKINGHAM hears) Oh Buckingham, watch out for that dog, Richard! When he seems to be fawning on you, he’s actually about to bite. And his poisonous bite kills. Have nothing to do with him. Beware of him. All the powers of sin, death, and hell are doing his bidding."
"What doth she say, my lord of Buckingham?","What is she saying, my lord?"
"Nothing that I respect, my gracious lord.","Nothing that interests me, my good lord."
"What, dost thou scorn me for my gentle counsel, And soothe the devil that I warn thee from? When he shall split thy very heart with sorrow, And say poor Margaret was a prophetess.— Live each of you the subjects to his hate, And he to yours, and all of you to God’s.","What, you ignore my kind advice and try to please the devil I’m warning you about? Oh, just remember this another day, when he splits your heart in two with sorrow. Then you’ll say poor Margaret was a prophet. Richard will come to hate everyone here, as you will come to hate him—and as God will come to hate you all."
My hair doth stand an end to hear her curses.,Her curses have made my hair stand on end.
And so doth mine. I muse why she’s at liberty.,"Mine, too. I don’t understand why she’s not locked up."
"I cannot blame her. By God’s holy mother, She hath had too much wrong, and I repent My part thereof that I have done to her.",I can’t blame her. She has been wronged too often. I regret what I have done to hurt her.
"I never did her any, to my knowledge.","I never caused her any harm, as far as I know."
"Yet you have all the vantage of her wrong. I was too hot to do somebody good That is too cold in thinking of it now. Marry, as for Clarence, he is well repaid; God pardon them that are the cause thereof.","But you have all the advantages from the harm done. For my part, I was too eager to do King Edward good. He doesn’t even seem to notice now. And look how he’s repaid poor Clarence for his loyalty—penned him up like a pig being fattened for slaughter. God pardon those who are responsible for Clarence’s troubles."
A virtuous and a Christian-like conclusion To pray for them that have done scathe to us.,"That’s very virtuous and Christian of you, Richard, to pray for those who have done us harm."
"So do I ever (aside) being well-advised,","I always pray for them (to himself) because “they” are none other than myself. If I cursed Clarence’s wrongdoers, I’d be cursing myself."
"Madam, his majesty doth call for you,— And for your Grace, —and yours, my gracious lords.","Madam, his majesty asks for you, and for you, Duke of Gloucester, and for you, my noble lords."
"Catesby, I come. —Lords, will you go with me?","Catesby, we’ll be there soon.—Lords, will you come with me?"
We wait upon your Grace.,"We will wait on you, your majesty."
"The secret mischiefs that I set abroach I lay unto the grievous charge of others. Clarence, whom I indeed have cast in darkness, I do beweep to many simple gulls, And tell them ’tis the queen and her allies That stir the king against the duke my brother. Now they believe it and withal whet me To be revenged on Rivers, Dorset, Grey; Tell them that God bids us do good for evil; And thus I clothe my naked villainy With odd old ends stolen out of Holy Writ, And seem a saint when most I play the devil.","Incredible. I do the wrong and am the first to start quarrels. What I did in secret I blame on others. I cry about Clarence, whom I had imprisoned, in front of these simple fools—namely, Hastings, Derby and Buckingham—and tell them that the queen and her allies roused the king against my brother Clarence. They believe me and urge me to take revenge on Rivers, Vaughan, and Grey. But then I sigh and quote a chunk of the Bible—how God says do good in return for evil. Ha! Dressing my out-and-out wickedness in scraps of Scripture, I look like a saint exactly when I’m most like the devil."
"How now, my hardy, stout, resolvèd mates? Are you now going to dispatch this thing?","But quiet. Here come the murderers I’ve hired. How’s it going, hardy, reliable friends! Are you going to take care of this thing now?"
"We are, my lord, and come to have the warrant That we may be admitted where he is.","We are, my lord. We’ve come to get the warrant so we can be let into his cell."
"He gives a paper When you have done, repair to Crosby Place. But, sirs, be sudden in the execution, Withal obdurate; do not hear him plead, May move your hearts to pity if you mark him.","Good thinking. I have it on me here. (he hands over the warrant) When you’re done, go to Crosby Place. But, sirs, do the job fast. And stick to your mission. Don’t let him plead for his life, because Clarence is a good talker and may make you pity him if you let him get started."
"Tut, tut, my lord, we will not stand to prate. Talkers are no good doers. Be assured We go to use our hands and not our tongues.","Tut, tut, my lord, we’re not going to stand around chit-chatting. Talkers aren’t good doers. Rest assured that we’re going there to use our hands, not our tongues."
"I like you lads. About your business straight. Go, go, dispatch.","When fools cry, you remain stony. I like you guys. Go straight to work. Hurry now, get the job done."
"We will, my noble lord.","We will, my noble lord."
Why looks your grace so heavily today?,"Why do you look so depressed today, your Grace?"
"O, I have passed a miserable night, So full of ugly dreams, of ugly sights, That, as I am a Christian faithful man, Though ’twere to buy a world of happy days, So full of dismal terror was the time.","Oh, I had a miserable night. I had such dark and terrifying dreams that I swear I wouldn’t spend another night like that if it guaranteed me a whole lifetime of happy days."
"What was your dream, my lord? I pray you tell me.",What was your dream? Tell me.
"Methoughts that I had broken from the Tower And in my company my brother Gloucester, Who from my cabin tempted me to walk Upon the hatches. Thence we looked toward England And cited up a thousand fearful times, That had befall'n us. As we paced along Upon the giddy footing of the hatches, Methought that Gloucester stumbled, and in falling Struck me, that thought to stay him, overboard O Lord, methought what pain it was to drown, What dreadful noise of waters in my ears, What sights of ugly death within my eyes. Methoughts I saw a thousand fearful wracks, Wedges of gold, great anchors, heaps of pearl, Inestimable stones, unvalued jewels, All scattered in the bottom of the sea.","I thought I had escaped from the Tower and was on a ship to France with my brother Richard, who persuaded me to leave my cabin and walk on deck with him. Looking toward England, we reminisced about the countless frightening experiences we’d had in the wars between the Yorks and the Lancasters. As we were pacing the deck, which was tipping heavily, Richard seemed to stumble, and as I tried to grab hold of him and keep him from falling, he knocked me overboard into the crashing waves. Lord, how painful it was to drown. The sound of the rushing water was terrible, and so were the sights. I saw a thousand shipwrecks, a thousand men whom fish had gnawed to the bone, huge anchors, chunks of gold, heaps of pearls, and precious jewels—all scattered on the bottom of the sea."
"Some lay in dead men’s skulls, and in the holes As ’twere in scorn of eyes—reflecting gems, That wooed the slimy bottom of the deep And mocked the dead bones that lay scattered by.",Some of the gems had wedged themselves like imitation eyes into the dead men’s skulls. The fake eyes gazed dully at the bones scattered around.
Had you such leisure in the time of death,So you had time as you were dying to look around?
"Methought I had, and often did I strive To yield the ghost, but still the envious flood Stopped in my soul and would not let it forth To find the empty, vast, and wand'ring air, Who almost burst to belch it in the sea.","I thought I did, and I often tried to die. But the terrible water always held me back. It wouldn’t let my soul find its way to air but smothered it inside my gasping body. My body wanted so badly to vomit up my spirit that it almost burst."
Awaked you not in this sore agony?,And didn’t you wake up during this terrible agony?
"No, no, my dream was lengthened after life. O, then began the tempest to my soul. With that sour ferryman which poets write of, Unto the kingdom of perpetual night. The first that there did greet my stranger-soul Was my great father-in-law, renownèd Warwick, Can this dark monarchy afford false Clarence?” And so he vanished. Then came wand'ring by A shadow like an angel, with bright hair Dabbled in blood, and he shrieked out aloud","Oh, no, my dream went on even after I died. In fact, the real nightmare had only just begun. With the help of the grim ferryman According to Greek mythology, an old man, Charon, ferries the dead across the river Styx to Hades, the underworld for the good and bad alike. Shakespeare adds a certain Christian flavor here to alter this tradition: the underworld of Clarence’s dream is hellish. ferryman that poets like to write about, my soul crossed the river into the kingdom of endless night. The first to greet me there was my great father-in-law Clarence abandoned Warwick, who fought for the Lancasters, to join forces with his own brother King Edward IV. father-in-law , the famous earl of Warwick. He cried aloud, “What terrible punishment can this dark realm devise for the oath-breaker Clarence?” And he vanished. Then a ghost like an angel with its hair spattered in blood wandered by, and shieked,"
"That stabbed me in the field by Tewkesbury. Seize on him, furies. Take him unto torment.” With that, methoughts, a legion of foul fiends Environed me and howlèd in mine ears I trembling waked, and for a season after Could not believe but that I was in hell, Such terrible impression made my dream.","“Clarence has arrived—lying, cowardly Clarence The ghost in Clarence’s dream was Prince Edward, Queen Margaret’s and King Henry VI’s son. Clarence helped kill Prince Edward. Clarence , who stabbed me at Tewksbury. Grab him, avenging spirits, and torment him.” With that, a legion of ugly demons surrounded me and howled so loudly in my ears that I woke up trembling and for a long time thought I was still in hell."
"No marvel, lord, though it affrighted you.","I’m not surprised it scared you, my lord. It scares me just to hear you talk about it."
"Ah keeper, keeper, I have done those things, That now give evidence against my soul, For Edward’s sake, and see how he requites me.— O God, if my deep prayers cannot appease thee, Yet execute thy wrath in me alone! O, spare my guiltless wife and my poor children!— Keeper, I prithee sit by me awhile. My soul is heavy, and I fain would sleep.","Oh, keeper, keeper, the bad things I’ve done are finally taking their toll. I did them for Edward’s sake—and look how he rewards me.—Oh God, if my prayers don’t satisfy you, and you have to avenge the wrongs I’ve done, at least punish me alone! Please spare my innocent wife and children!—Kind warden, please stay with me for a while. I’m feeling very low, and I need to sleep."
"I will, my lord. God give your Grace good rest.","I’ll stay, my lord. May God bring you sleep!"
"Sorrow breaks seasons and reposing hours, Makes the night morning, and the noontide night. Princes have but their titles for their glories, An outward honor for an inward toil,",Sorrow interrupts all hours and seasons. It turns everything around—the night into morning and noon into night. The only glory princes have are their titles.
"They often feel a world of restless cares, So that betwixt their titles and low name There’s nothing differs but the outward fame.","Instead of the pleasures we think they’re enjoying, they experience a whole world of worries. It turns out the only difference between them and peasants is their fame."
"Ho, who’s here?",Ho! Who’s there?
"What wouldst thou, fellow? And how cam’st thou hither?","What do you want, fellow? And how did you get in here?"
"I would speak with Clarence, and I came hither on my legs.","I want to speak with Clarence, and I came here on my legs."
"What, so brief?",That’s it? Nothing to add?
"'Tis better, sir, to be brief than tedious.—Let him see our commission, and talk no more.","Well, sir, it’s better to say little than to be tedious. (to SECOND MURDERER) Show him our orders and keep your mouth shut."
"The noble duke of Clarence to your hands. I will not reason what is meant hereby Because I will be guiltless from the meaning. There lies the duke asleep, and there the keys. I’ll to the king and signify to him That thus I have resigned my charge to you.","It orders me to hand the noble duke of Clarence over to you. I won’t ask why because I’d rather not know than feel guilty if you’re doing something you shouldn’t be. Here are the keys, and there is the duke, sleeping. (he hands them the keys) I’ll go to the king to let him know I’ve handed my prisoner over to you."
"You may, sir. 'Tis a point of wisdom. Fare you well.","You may, sir. That’s a wise idea. Goodbye."
"What, shall I stab him as he sleeps?","What, should I stab him while he sleeps?"
"No. He’ll say ’twas done cowardly, when he wakes.","No. When he wakes up, he’ll say we killed him like cowards."
"Why, he shall never wake until the great Judgment Day.","When he wakes up! Why, he won’t wake up till Judgment Day."
"Why, then he’ll say we stabbed him sleeping.","Okay, so that’s when he’ll say we stabbed him in his sleep."
The urging of that word “judgment” hath bred a kind of remorse in me.,That word “judgment” makes me feel a bit guilty.
"What, art thou afraid?","What, are you afraid?"
"Not to kill him, having a warrant, but to be damned for killing him, from the which no warrant can defend me.","Not of killing him, because I have a warrant for it, but of being damned for killing him, which no warrant can protect me from."
I thought thou hadst been resolute.,I thought you were resolved to do this.
So I am—to let him live.,I am resolved—to let him live.
I’ll back to the duke of Gloucester and tell him so.,I’ll go back to the duke of Gloucester and tell him so.
"Nay, I prithee stay a little. I hope this passionate humor of mine will change. It was wont to hold me but while one tells twenty.","Please, just wait a minute. I’m hoping my holy mood will pass. It usually only lasts about twenty seconds."
How dost thou feel thyself now?,How are you feeling now?
"Faith, some certain dregs of conscience are yet within me.","Actually, I’m still feeling some pangs of conscience."
Remember our reward when the deed’s done.,Remember the reward we’re getting when the deed’s done.
"Zounds, he dies! I had forgot the reward.","Jesus, let’s kill him! I forgot about the reward."
Where’s thy conscience now?,Where’s your conscience now?
"O, in the duke of Gloucester’s purse.","Oh, in the duke of Gloucester’s wallet."
"So when he opens his purse to give us our reward, thy conscience flies out.","When he opens his wallet to give us our pay, your conscience will fly out?"
'Tis no matter. Let it go. There’s few or none will entertain it.,It won’t matter. Let it fly out. No one will listen to it.
What if it come to thee again?,And what will you do if it returns to you?
"I’ll not meddle with it. It makes a man a coward: a man cannot steal but it accuseth him; a man cannot swear but it checks him; a man cannot lie with his neighbor’s wife but it detects him. 'Tis a blushing, shamefaced spirit that mutinies in a man’s bosom. It fills a man full of obstacles. It made me once restore a purse of gold that by chance I found. It beggars any man that keeps it. It is turned out of towns and cities for a dangerous thing, and every man that means to live well endeavors to trust to himself and live without it.","I won’t bother with it. Conscience makes a man a coward. If he steals, it accuses him. If he wants to swear, it restrains him. If he sleeps with his neighbor’s wife, it exposes him. It blushes, is easily embarrassed, and stages regular uprisings in a man’s heart. It’s just too much trouble. It once made me return a purse full of money that I found—it turns anyone who treats it decently into a beggar. It has been thrown out of all sorts of towns and cities it visits, and anyone who wants to live well should learn to trust only himself and live without it."
"Zounds, ’tis even now at my elbow, persuading me not to kill the duke.","My God, now the thing is at my elbow, persuading me not to kill the duke."
"Take the devil in thy mind, and believe him not. He would insinuate with thee but to make thee sigh.",Stop your conscience and don’t listen to him. He wants to take over your thoughts and make you sad.
I am strong-framed. He cannot prevail with me.,I’m strong-willed. He won’t get the better of me.
"Spoke like a tall man that respects thy reputation. Come, shall we fall to work?",Spoken like a brave man who respects his reputation. Shall we get to work?
"Take him on the costard with the hilts of thy sword, and then throw him into the malmsey butt in the next room.","We’ll hit him on the head with the handles of our swords, then throw him in the wine barrel in the next room."
O excellent device— and make a sop of him.,What an excellent idea—he’ll soak up the wine!
"Soft, he wakes.",Wait a moment. He’s waking up.
Strike!,Strike!
"No, we’ll reason with him.","No, first let’s talk to him."
"Where art thou, keeper? Give me a cup of wine.","Where are you, keeper? Give me a cup of wine."
"You shall have wine enough, my lord, anon.","You’ll have wine enough, my lord, soon."
"In God’s name, what art thou?","In God’s name, who are you?"
"A man, as you are.","A man, like you."
"But not, as I am, royal.","But not a member of the royal family, like me."
"Nor you, as we are, loyal.","And you’re not loyal, like us."
"Thy voice is thunder, but thy looks are humble.","Your voice is loud and commanding, but you look like a working man."
"My voice is now the king’s, my looks mine own.","I’m speaking for the king, but I look like myself."
How darkly and how deadly dost thou speak! Who sent you hither? Wherefore do you come?,The things you say scare me! Your eyes look threatening. And why are you so pale? Who sent you here? Why are you here?
"To, to, to—","To, to, to—"
To murder me?,To murder me?
"Ay, ay.",Yes.
"And therefore cannot have the hearts to do it. Wherein, my friends, have I offended you?","You barely have the heart to tell me, so you can’t possibly have the nerve to do it. Besides, how have I offended you, my friends?"
"Offended us you have not, but the king.","You didn’t offend us, you offended the king."
I shall be reconciled to him again.,He and I will make up.
"Never, my lord. Therefore prepare to die.","Never, my lord. So prepare to die."
"Are you drawn forth among a world of men To slay the innocent? What is my offense? Where is the evidence that doth accuse me? What lawful quest have given their verdict up The bitter sentence of poor Clarence' death Before I be convict by course of law? To threaten me with death is most unlawful. I charge you, as you hope to have redemption, That you depart, and lay no hands on me. The deed you undertake is damnable.","It’s your job in life to kill the innocent? What did I do wrong? Where’s the evidence against me? Where’s the jury, the judge, the lawful proceedings, the verdict? Who pronounced this death sentence before a court of law could even convict me? For you to threaten to kill me is most unlawful. If you hope to have your sins forgiven by Christ’s dear blood, which He shed for our terrible sins, you must leave and keep your hands off me. You’ll go to Hell for the deed you’re planning to do."
"What we will do, we do upon command.",What we do we have been commanded to do.
And he that hath commanded is our king.,And the one who commands us is our king.
"Hath in the tables of His law commanded That thou shalt do no murder. Will thou then Spurn at His edict and fulfill a man’s? Take heed, for He holds vengeance in His hand","Wrong-headed slaves, the King of kings says in his Ten Commandments, “Thou shalt not murder.” Will you defy God and obey a man? Be careful. God takes revenge on those who break His laws."
And that same vengeance doth He hurl on thee For false forswearing and for murder too. Thou didst receive the sacrament to fight In quarrel of the house of Lancaster.,"He does, and now he’s taking revenge on you—for breaking promises and for murder, too. You took a holy oath to fight for King Henry VI."
"Didst break that vow, and with thy treacherous blade Unrippedst the bowels of thy sovereign’s son.","And like a traitor to God, you broke that oath and savagely murdered King Henry’s young son."
Whom thou wert sworn to cherish and defend.,Whom you swore you would protect and defend.
How canst thou urge God’s dreadful law to us,How dare you tell us about God’s laws when you have broken them so savagely yourself?
"Alas! For whose sake did I that ill deed? For Edward, for my brother, for his sake. He sends you not to murder me for this, For in that sin he is as deep as I. O, know you yet He doth it publicly! Take not the quarrel from His powerful arm; He needs no indirect or lawless course To cut off those that have offended Him.","But for whose sake did I do that sick deed? For my brother Edward’s sake. He couldn’t be sending you to murder me for that sin, because he’s the one who asked me to commit it. He is as guilty as I am. If God will be revenged for this deed, he will do it publicly. God doesn’t need to use indirect or illegal means to kill those who have offended him."
"When gallant-springing, brave Plantagenet, That princely novice, was struck dead by thee?","Then who were you working for when you killed brave, young Prince Edward?"
"My brother’s love, the devil, and my rage.","My brother’s love, the devil, and my own anger made me do it."
"Thy brother’s love, our duty, and thy faults","Well, your brother’s love, our duty, and your own crimes make us kill you."
"If you do love my brother, hate not me. I am his brother, and I love him well. If you are hired for meed, go back again, And I will send you to my brother Gloucester, Than Edward will for tidings of my death.","If you love my brother, don’t hate me. I am his brother, and I love him very much. If you’re doing this for pay, go to my brother Richard. He will pay you more for saving my life than Edward will for killing me."
You are deceived. Your brother Gloucester hates you.,"You’re mistaken. Richard, the duke of Gloucester, hates you."
"O, no, he loves me, and he holds me dear. Go you to him from me.","No, he loves and cherishes me. Go to him from me."
"Ay, so we will.",We will.
"Blessed his three sons with his victorious arm, He little thought of this divided friendship. Bid Gloucester think of this, and he will weep.","Tell him that when our noble father, the duke of York, gave his three sons his blessing, he never imagined that our friendship would come to this. Remind Richard of this, and he will weep."
"Ay, millstones, as he lessoned us to weep.","Yes, he’ll weep stones, as he taught us to do."
"O, do not slander him, for he is kind.",Don’t lie about my brother. He is kind.
"Right, as snow in harvest. Come, you deceive yourself. 'Tis he that sends us to destroy you here.","Yes, as kind as snow to a harvest. Come on, you’re fooling yourself. It’s Richard who sent us here to slaughter you."
"It cannot be, for he bewept my fortune, And hugged me in his arms, and swore with sobs","It cannot be. When I left him, he hugged me in his arms and swore between sobs that he would work to set me free."
"Why, so he doth, when he delivers you From this earth’s thralldom to the joys of heaven.","Well, that’s what he’s doing—making you free to enjoy heaven."
"Make peace with God, for you must die, my lord.","Make peace with God, for you must die, my lord."
"Have you that holy feeling in your souls And art you yet to your own souls so blind That thou will war with God by murd'ring me? O sirs, consider: they that set you on To do this deed will hate you for the deed.","You have enough holy feeling to advise me to “make peace with God,” but you’re willing to go to war with God by murdering me? Oh sirs, consider this: those who sent you to do this deed will hate you for doing it."
(to FIRST MURDERER) What shall we do?,(to FIRST MURDERER) What should we do?
"Relent, and save your souls. Which of you—if you were a prince’s son Being pent from liberty, as I am now— If two such murderers as yourselves came to you, Would not entreat for life? Ay, you would beg,","Relent, and save your souls. If either of you were a prince’s son, and you were imprisoned as I am now, and two murderers like yourselves came to you—wouldn’t you beg for your life? Yes, you would beg, if you were in my position."
Relent? No. 'Tis cowardly and womanish.,Relent? No. That’s cowardly and womanish.
"Not to relent is beastly, savage, devilish. (to SECOND MURDERER) My friend, I spy some pity in thy looks. Come thou on my side and entreat for me. A begging prince what beggar pities not?","No, sticking to your plan is beastly, savage, devilish. (to SECOND MURDERER) My friend, I detect some pity in your eyes. Please, please take my side and argue for my life. What beggar wouldn’t have sympathy for a prince reduced to begging?"
"Look behind you, my lord.","Look behind you, my lord."
"Take that, and that. (stabs CLARENCE) I’ll drown you in the malmsey butt within.","Take that, and that. (he stabs CLARENCE) If this won’t do the job, I’ll drown you in the wine barrel in the next room."
"A bloody deed, and desperately dispatched. How fain, like Pilate, would I wash my hands Of this most grievous murder.","A bloody deed Pontius Pilate was the Roman governor who ordered Jesus Christ to be crucified. As if to suggest that he was washing away his own guilt, Pilate washed his hands in public before the execution. bloody deed , and desperately executed. I wish I could wash my hands of this terrible murder, like Pilate."
"By heavens, the duke shall know how slack you have been.","What’s going on? What did you mean by not helping me? By God, I’m going to tell the duke how slack you’ve been."
"I would he knew that I had saved his brother. Take thou the fee, and tell him what I say, For I repent me that the duke is slain.",I wish you could tell him I saved his brother. Take the money yourself and tell him what I said. I’m sorry this duke was killed.
"Well, I’ll go hide the body in some hole Till that the duke give order for his burial. And when I have my meed, I will away, For this will out, and then I must not stay.","I’m not. Go, coward that you are. Well, I’ll go hide the body in some hole until the duke gives orders for his burial. And when I get my reward, I’ll get out of here. The truth about this will come out, and I can’t stick around then."
"Why, so. Now have I done a good day’s work. You peers, continue this united league. I every day expect an embassage From my Redeemer to redeem me hence, Since I have made my friends at peace on earth Rivers and Hastings, take each other’s hand. Dissemble not your hatred. Swear your love.","Well. Now I’ve done a good day’s work. You must all keep up this united front. Every day I expect a message from God to bring me away from here. Now my soul can depart for heaven peacefully, since my friends have made peace here on earth. Rivers and Hastings, take each other’s hand. Don’t simply hide your hatred. Swear your love for each other."
"(taking HASTINGS’s hand) By heaven, my soul is purged from grudging hate,","(taking HASTINGS’s hand) I swear I have cleansed my heart of all hate. With this handshake, I guarantee my love."
So thrive I as I truly swear the like.,"On my honor, I feel the same."
"Take heed you dally not before your king, Lest He that is the supreme King of kings Either of you to be the other’s end.","Make sure you mean what you say. Otherwise God, the ultimate King, will uncover your lies and cause you to be the death of each other."
So prosper I as I swear perfect love.,"On my honor, I swear I love Rivers with all my heart."
And I as I love Hastings with my heart.,And I love Hastings with all my heart.
"(to QUEEN ELIZABETH) Nor you, son Dorset, —Buckingham, nor you. You have been factious one against the other.— Wife, love Lord Hastings. Let him kiss your hand, And what you do, do it unfeignedly.","(to QUEEN ELIZABETH) Madam, you’re not exempt from this—nor are you, Dorset— nor you, Buckingham. You have had too many separate factions among you. My dear wife, let Lord Hastings kiss your hand. And don’t do it merely for appearance’s sake."
"Our former hatred, so thrive I and mine.","Take my hand, Hastings. From now on, I’ll forget the hatred I used to feel for you."
"Dorset, embrace him.—Hastings, love Lord Marquess.","Dorset, embrace Hastings.—Hastings, express your affection for the marquess of Dorset."
"This interchange of love, I here protest, Upon my part shall be inviolable.",I swear I will never break this promise of love.
And so swear I.,"And so do I, my lord."
"Now, princely Buckingham, seal thou this league With thy embracements to my wife’s allies And make me happy in your unity.","Now, noble Buckingham, seal this alliance by embracing my wife’s friends, and make me happy in your unity."
"(to QUEEN ELIZABETH) Upon your Grace, but with all duteous love Doth cherish you and yours, God punish me When I have most need to employ a friend, With hate in those where I expect most love. Deep, hollow, treacherous, and full of guile Be he unto me: this do I beg of God When I am cold in love to you or yours.","(to QUEEN ELIZABETH) If I ever turn my hatred toward your majesty, and do not love and cherish you and yours, may God punish me. May I find hatred where I most expect love. When I most need a friend, and when I’m sure I have one, make him treacherous and deceitful to me. I beg God to do all this whenever I fail to show love to you or yours."
"A pleasing cordial, princely Buckingham, There wanteth now our brother Gloucester here To make the blessèd period of this peace.","Noble Buckingham, your promise is like medicine to my ailing heart. All we need to put the final touches on this future peace is for Richard to appear."
"And in good time, Here comes Sir Richard Ratcliffe and the duke.","And just in time, here he comes with Sir Richard Ratcliffe."
"And, princely peers, a happy time of day.","Good morning to my sovereign king and queen. Noble peers, how nice to see you."
"Happy indeed, as we have spent the day. Gloucester, we have done deeds of charity, Made peace of enmity, fair love of hate,","Happy indeed, the way we have spent the day. Gloucester, we have done deeds of charity, turning enmity into peace and hate into love among these mistakenly angry nobles."
"A blessèd labor, my most sovereign lord. Amongst this princely heap, if any here By false intelligence, or wrong surmise Hold me a foe, Have aught committed that is hardly borne By any in this presence, I desire To reconcile me to his friendly peace. 'Tis death to me to be at enmity; First, madam, I entreat true peace of you, Which I will purchase with my duteous service;— Of you, my noble cousin Buckingham, If ever any grudge were lodged between us;— That all without desert have frowned on me;— Of you, Lord Woodeville and Lord Scales;— of you, Dukes, earls, lords, gentlemen; indeed, of all. I do not know that Englishman alive More than the infant that is born tonight. I thank my God for my humility.","What blessed work, my king. If there’s anyone among this princely group who mistakes me for an enemy—if by accident or in anger I have done anything to offend you—I want to join with you in peaceful friendship. It kills me to be enemies with you. I hate it and want all good men’s love. (to QUEEN ELIZABETH) First, madam, I want there to be peace between you and me, which I will buy with my obedient service to you. And peace with you, my noble cousin Buckingham, if you ever felt any grudge against me; and with you, Lord Rivers, and, Lord Grey, with you. In fact, I want to get along with everyone who has frowned on me without good cause—dukes, earls, lords, gentlemen, everyone. There is not an Englishman alive with whom I’m at odds, anymore than a newborn baby would be. I thank God for my humbleness."
A holy day shall this be kept hereafter. I would to God all strifes were well compounded. To take our brother Clarence to your grace.,"Today shall always be remembered as a holy day. If only all struggles ended this well. One more thing, my dear majesty. Please pardon our brother Clarence."
"Why, madam, have I offered love for this, To be so flouted in this royal presence? Who knows not that the gentle duke is dead?","Why, madam, have I offered you my love only to be flouted in front of the king? Who doesn’t know that the good duke is dead?"
You do him injury to scorn his corse.,You do him wrong to laugh at his corpse.
Who knows not he is dead! Who knows he is?,Who doesn’t know he’s dead? Who says he is?
"All-seeing heaven, what a world is this!","Oh my God, what a terrible world this is!"
"Look I so pale, Lord Dorset, as the rest?","Do I look as pale as everyone else does, Lord Dorset?"
"Ay, my good lord, and no one in the presence","You do, my good lord. Everyone here has turned white."
Is Clarence dead? The order was reversed.,Is Clarence dead? But I reversed the death sentence.
"But he, poor man, by your first order died, And that a wingèd Mercury did bear. Some tardy cripple bear the countermand, God grant that some, less noble and less loyal, Nearer in bloody thoughts, and not in blood, Deserve not worse than wretched Clarence did, And yet go current from suspicion.","Well, the poor man died by your first order, which was carried by a winged messenger. Some tardy cripple must have taken the counter-order, who came after Clarence was already buried. It’s clear that someone less noble, less loyal, more bloody-minded than Clarence but not a blood relation, deserves as bad an end as my brother, but he goes free."
"(kneeling) A boon, my sovereign, for my service done.","(kneeling) I ask a favor of you in return for the service I’ve done, my king."
"I prithee, peace. My soul is full of sorrow.",Please be quiet. My soul is full of sorrow.
I will not rise unless your Highness hear me.,I will not rise until your Highness hears me.
Then say at once what is it thou requests.,Then hurry up and tell me what you want.
"The forfeit, sovereign, of my servant’s life, Lately attendant on the duke of Norfolk.","That you lift the death sentence on my servant, who killed a rowdy and belligerent former servant of the duke of Norfolk."
"Have I a tongue to doom my brother’s death, And shall the tongue give pardon to a slave? My brother killed no man; his fault was thought, Who sued to me for him? Who, in my wrath, Kneeled at my feet, and bade me be advised? Who spoke of brotherhood? Who spoke of love? Who told me how the poor soul did forsake Who told me, in the field by Tewkesbury, When Oxford had me down, he rescued me, And said “Dear brother, live, and be a king”? Who told me, when we both lay in the field Even in his garments and did give himself, All thin and naked, to the numb-cold night? All this from my remembrance brutish wrath Sinfully plucked, and not a man of you But when your carters or your waiting vassals Have done a drunken slaughter and defaced The precious image of our dear Redeemer, You straight are on your knees for pardon, pardon, Stanley rises But for my brother, not a man would speak, Nor I, ungracious, speak unto myself For him, poor soul. The proudest of you all Yet none of you would once beg for his life. O God, I fear Thy justice will take hold On me and you, and mine and yours for this!— Come, Hastings, help me to my closet.—","I was willing to condemn my brother to death, but you want me to pardon a peasant? My brother didn’t kill anyone. He was only to blame for some thoughts he had. But his punishment was bitter death. Who pleaded with me to pardon his life? Who, when I was in a rage, kneeled at my feet and told me to reconsider? Who talked about brotherhood? Who talked about love? Who told me how the poor man abandoned the mighty earl of Warwick to fight for me? Who told me how he rescued me in the field at Tewksbury, when Oxford had me down, saying, “Dear brother, live and be a king”? Who told me how, when we both lay in the field freezing to death, he wrapped me in his own clothes and spent a numbingly cold night naked? I forgot all of this in my brutish anger, and not one of you had the grace to remind me. But when your servants get drunk and kill someone, you go right down on your knees for “pardon, pardon.” And, though he doesn’t deserve it, I have to grant your request. But not one of you would speak up for my brother. And I didn’t speak to myself on his behalf, either. The best of you owed something to him in his lifetime, but none of you would plead for his life. Oh God, I fear your justice will destroy me and all of these men, and their families and mine, because of this! Come, Hastings, help me to my room. Oh, poor Clarence."
"This is the fruits of rashness. Marked you not How that the guilty kindred of the queen Looked pale when they did hear of Clarence' death? O, they did urge it still unto the king. To comfort Edward with our company?","This is what happens when you act rashly. Did you notice how the queen’s guilty relatives turned pale when they heard about Clarence’s death? Oh, they continually urged the king to do it. God will revenge it. But come, lords, will you come with me to Edward’s room to comfort him?"
We wait upon your Grace.,"We’ll come with you, your Grace."
"Good grandam, tell us, is our father dead?","Tell me, good grandmother, is our father dead?"
"No, boy.","No, boy."
"Why do you weep so oft, and beat your breast, And cry, “O Clarence, my unhappy son?”","Then why do you weep so often, and beat your breast, and cry, “Oh Clarence, my unlucky son”?"
"And call us orphans, wretches, castaways, If that our noble father were alive?","Why do you look at us and shake your head, and call us orphans, wretches, castaways, if our noble father is still alive?"
"My pretty cousins, you mistake me both. I do lament the sickness of the king, It were lost sorrow to wail one that’s lost.","My pretty children, both of you misunderstand me. I’m lamenting the sickness of the king, because I’d hate to lose him—I’m not mourning your father’s death. What would be the point of crying over someone who was already dead?"
"Then, you conclude, my grandam, he is dead. The king mine uncle is to blame for it. God will revenge it, whom I will importune","So you’re admitting Clarence, my father, is dead. My uncle the king is to blame for this. God will take revenge. I will pray every day that he does."
And so will I.,And so will I.
"Peace, children, peace. The king doth love you well. Incapable and shallow innocents, You cannot guess who caused your father’s death.","Quiet, children, quiet. The king loves you very much. Innocent sweethearts, you have no idea who’s responsible for your father’s death."
"Told me the king, provoked to it by the queen, Devised impeachments to imprison him; And when my uncle told me so, he wept, And pitied me, and kindly kissed my cheek, And he would love me dearly as a child.","Yes we do, grandmother, because my good uncle Richard told me. He said the king was forced by the queen to make up charges against my father that would send him to prison. When my uncle explained this to me, he wept and hugged and kissed me. He told me I could rely on him as if he were my father, and he said he would love me as if I were his child."
"Ah, that deceit should steal such gentle shape, And with a virtuous visor hide deep vice. He is my son, ay, and therein my shame,","Ah, it’s a shame that a liar can seem so nice, hiding his wicked intentions under a mask of goodness. He is my son, yes, and I’m ashamed of him. But he didn’t get his deceitfulness from my breast."
"Think you my uncle did dissemble, grandam?","You think my uncle was lying, grandmother?"
"Ay, boy.","Yes, boy."
"I cannot think it. Hark, what noise is this?",I can’t believe that. Wait! What’s that noise?
"Ah, who shall hinder me to wail and weep, I’ll join with black despair against my soul And to myself become an enemy.",No one can stop me now from wailing and weeping about my terrible luck. I don’t care if it kills me. I plan to fall into the blackest despair.
What means this scene of rude impatience?,Why are you making such a scene?
To make an act of tragic violence. Why grow the branches when the root is gone? Why wither not the leaves that want their sap?,"I’m simply performing the violent tragedy that is my life: Edward—my husband, your son, our king—is dead. Why should we live now that our leader is dead? Why are the branches still living when the root is gone? Why aren’t the leaves withering now that the sap is all dried up?"
"If you will live, lament. If die, be brief, That our swift-wingèd souls may catch the king’s, To his new kingdom of ne'er-changing night.","If you do intend to live, then mourn. If you’re going to die, be quick about it so you can catch the king’s departing soul or follow him, like obedient subjects, to his new kingdom of endless night."
"Ah, so much interest have I in thy sorrow As I had title in thy noble husband. I have bewept a worthy husband’s death But now two mirrors of his princely semblance Are cracked in pieces by malignant death, And I, for comfort, have but one false glass That grieves me when I see my shame in him. And hast the comfort of thy children left, But death hath snatched my husband from mine arms And plucked two crutches from my feeble hands, Clarence and Edward. O, what cause have I, To overgo thy woes and drown thy cries!","As the king’s mother, I have a large share in your grief. I have wept at my own good husband’s death and only kept myself alive by looking at his sons, the mirror images of him. But now these two mirrors of their princely father have cracked to pieces: my sons are dead. And my only comfort is Richard, who is nothing like his father and only causes me shame. You may be a widow, but you’re also a mother. You have your children as comfort. But death has snatched my husband from my arms and plucked my two crutches, Edward and Clarence, from my feeble hands. Since your woes are only a portion of mine, I have every reason to surpass your lamentations and drown out your cries with my own."
"(to QUEEN ELIZABETH) Ah, aunt, you wept not for our father’s death. How can we aid you with our kindred tears?","(to QUEEN ELIZABETH) Ah, Aunt, you didn’t weep at our father’s death. How can we help you by crying for your sorrow?"
Our fatherless distress was left unmoaned.,You didn’t sympathize with us when we became orphans; we won’t cry for you!
"Give me no help in lamentation. I am not barren to bring forth complaints. All springs reduce their currents to mine eyes, That I, being governed by the watery moon, Ah, for my husband, for my dear lord Edward!","I don’t need your help in grieving. I have my own sources of misery. In fact, all the world’s springs and oceans flow from my weeping eyes. I could drown the world. My poor husband, my dear Edward!"
"Ah, for our father, for our dear lord Clarence!","Our poor father, Clarence!"
"Alas for both, both mine, Edward and Clarence!",My sons Edward and Clarence!
What stay had I but Edward? And he’s gone.,What support did I have other than Edward? And now he’s gone.
What stay had we but Clarence? And he’s gone.,What support did we have besides our father? And now he’s gone.
What stays had I but they? And they are gone.,What support did I have besides my two sons? And now they’re both gone.
Was never widow had so dear a loss.,There has never been a widow who suffered such loss as me.
Were never orphans had so dear a loss.,There have never been orphans who’ve suffered what we have.
"Was never mother had so dear a loss. Their woes are parceled; mine are general. She for an Edward weeps, and so do I; I for a Clarence weep; so doth not she. These babes for Clarence weep and so do I; Alas, you three, on me, threefold distressed, Pour all your tears. I am your sorrow’s nurse, And I will pamper it with lamentations.","There was never a mother who suffered so much loss. Alas, I am the mother of all these others' griefs. Each of them has a single loss, while I share them all. She weeps for Edward and so do I, while she does not weep for Clarence, though I do. These young children cry for Clarence and so do I, though they don’t cry for Edward, as I do. Alas, all of you can turn to me with your sorrow, because I feel all of it. I will comfort you by adding my own grief to your sorrow."
"(to QUEEN ELIZABETH) Comfort, dear mother. God is much displeased In common worldly things, ’tis called ungrateful With dull unwillingness to repay a debt Which with a bounteous hand was kindly lent; Much more to be thus opposite with heaven,","(to QUEEN ELIZABETH) Calm down, dear mother. God is unhappy that you’ve responded so unthankfully to his doings. In everyday life, when a person is unwilling to pay back a loan that was generously offered, he’s considered ungrateful. How much worse it is when Heaven is the lender, as in your case?"
"Madam, bethink you, like a careful mother, Of the young prince your son. Send straight for him. Let him be crowned. In him your comfort lives. Drown desperate sorrow in dead Edward’s grave","Be a careful mother, madam, and think about your son, the young prince. Send for him right away and have him crowned. Your peace of mind depends on him. Bury your sorrows in dead Edward’s grave and plant your hopes in Prince Edward’s rise to the throne."
"Sister, have comfort. All of us have cause To wail the dimming of our shining star, But none can help our harms by wailing them.— Madam, my mother, I do cry you mercy; I crave your blessing.","Sister, calm down. All of us have reason to mourn the dimming of our shining star the king. But no good comes from all this wailing. Oh, mother, forgive me. I didn’t see you there. On my knee, I humbly ask your blessing."
"God bless thee, and put meekness in thy breast, Love, charity, obedience, and true duty.","God bless you and make you obedient, loving, and kind."
(standing) Amen. (aside) And make me die a good old man! I marvel that her Grace did leave it out.,(he stands) Amen. (to himself) And make me die a good old man! That should be the point of a mother’s blessing. I’m surprised my mother forgot to make it.
"You cloudy princes and heart-sorrowing peers That bear this heavy mutual load of moan, Now cheer each other in each other’s love. We are to reap the harvest of his son. The broken rancor of your high-swoll'n hates, But lately splintered, knit, and joined together, Must gently be preserved, cherished, and kept. Forthwith from Ludlow the young prince be fet Hither to London, to be crowned our king.","You mournful princes and grieving gentlemen who have been sharing this burden of grief, now it’s time to cheer each other up with love. Though we have lost a generous king, we are about to enjoy the benefits of a new king. We must preserve our goodwill toward each other and not break into factions again. I think a few members of the court should fetch the young prince from Wales and bring him to London to be crowned our king."
"Why “with some little train,” my Lord of Buckingham?","Why only a few courtiers, my lord of Buckingham?"
"Marry, my lord, lest by a multitude Which would be so much the more dangerous By how much the estate is green and yet ungoverned. Where every horse bears his commanding rein And may direct his course as please himself, In my opinion, ought to be prevented.","Because if many of us go there, the hostility between us may break out again, which would be very dangerous with the young prince so newly crowned. When you have a situation where everyone seems free to take off on his or her own, it’s important that the heads of state keep a low profile. We wouldn’t want the prince or his new authority to be undermined by squabbling factions."
I hope the king made peace with all of us; And the compact is firm and true in me.,"The king made peace among all of us. I, at least, intend to stick to our agreement to get along."
"And so in me, and so, I think, in all. To no apparent likelihood of breach, Which haply by much company might be urged. Therefore I say with noble Buckingham That it is meet so few should fetch the prince.","And so do I. I think we all do. But, since our agreement is a recent development, it shouldn’t be put to the test, which could happen if the coronation turned into a huge ceremony. So, I agree with noble Buckingham—only a few should go to meet the prince."
And so say I.,I think so too.
"Then be it so, and go we to determine Who they shall be that straight shall post to Ludlow.— Madam, and you, my sister, will you go To give your censures in this business?","Then we’re agreed. Now we need to figure out which of us will go to meet him. Madam and mother, will you go to offer your support to this weighty business?"
"For God’s sake let not us two at home. For by the way I’ll sort occasion, As index to the story we late talked of, To part the queen’s proud kindred from the prince.","For God’s sake, my lord, let’s be sure to be part of the group that meets the prince. Along the way, I’ll find an opportunity to separate him from the queen’s proud relatives, as step one in the plan we’ve discussed."
"My oracle, my prophet, my dear cousin, I, as a child, will go by thy direction Toward Ludlow then, for we’ll not stay behind.","You are my other self, my oracle, my prophet, my dear brother! I plan to act like a child and do exactly what you say. To Wales then, for we will not be left out."
"Good morrow, neighbor, whither away so fast?","Good morrow, neighbor, whither away so fast?"
I promise you I scarcely know myself. Hear you the news abroad?,"I’m telling you, I hardly know myself. Did you hear the news that’s going around?"
"Yes, that the king is dead.","Yes, that the king is dead."
"I fear, I fear, ’twill prove a giddy world.","Bad news, by God. The news is always bad. But this news is bound to make the world go mad."
"Neighbors, God speed.","Neighbors, hello."
"Give you good morrow, sir.","Good day to you, sir."
Doth this news hold of good King Edward’s death?,Is it true that good King Edward has died?
"Ay, sir, it is too true, God help the while.","Yes, sir, it’s all too true, God help us."
"Then, masters, look to see a troublous world.","Then, gentlemen, we can count on trouble."
"No, no, by God’s good grace, his son shall reign.","No, no, with God’s help, his son will be king."
Woe to the land that’s governed by a child.,It’s bad news when a country is ruled by a child.
"In him there is a hope of government, And, in his full and ripened years, himself, No doubt shall then, and till then, govern well.","His counselors will govern as long as he’s a minor, and then he’ll take over. It shouldn’t go so badly."
So stood the state when Henry the Sixth Was crowned in Paris but at nine months old.,"That’s how it was with Henry the Sixth, who was crowned in Paris when he was only nine months old."
For then this land was famously enriched With politic grave counsel; then the king Had virtuous uncles to protect his Grace.,"Really? But at that point, the king had the benefit of excellent counselors. His uncles were good men and protected him."
"Why, so hath this, both by the father and mother.","Well, this king has uncles too, on both his father and mother’s side."
"Or by the father there were none at all, For emulation who shall now be nearest Will touch us all too near if God prevent not. O, full of danger is the duke of Gloucester, And were they to be ruled, and not to rule, This sickly land might solace as before.","It would be better if they were all on his father’s side, or that there were none at all on his father’s side. As it is, the rivalry between his father’s and mother’s relatives over who will be closest to the king is likely to endanger everyone, if we’re not lucky.As it stands, there’s a struggle between the two sides for the prince’s attention. Richard, the duke of Gloucester, is very dangerous, and the queen’s sons and brothers are haughty and proud—it would be better for this ailing country if they were subjects, not rulers."
"Come, come, we fear the worst. All will be well.","Come, come, we’re worrying about the worst-case scenario. I’m sure everything will be fine."
"When clouds are seen, wise men put on their cloaks; When the sun sets, who doth not look for night? Untimely storms make men expect a dearth. All may be well; but if God sort it so, 'Tis more than we deserve or I expect.","When the day turns cloudy, wise men put on their coats. When leaves fall from the trees, it means winter has arrived. When the sun sets, who’s too stupid to recognize it’s night? When storms arrive early, you can expect the harvest will be damaged. So, if all turns out fine, as you say, it’s more than we deserve or I expect."
Ye cannot reason almost with a man That looks not heavily and full of dread.,"It’s true, people are really worried. It’s hard to find a person who isn’t."
"Before the days of change, still is it so. By a divine instinct, men’s minds mistrust The water swell before a boist'rous storm. But leave it all to God. Whither away?","It’s always like this in times of change. By some sort of deep instinct, we always know when danger is approaching, just as we know that a storm is coming when the sea swells. But leave it all to God. Where are you all off to?"
"Marry, we were sent for to the justices.",The court has sent for us.
And so was I. I’ll bear you company.,"For me, too. I’ll go with you."
"Last night, I hear, they lay at Stony Stratford, And at Northampton they do rest tonight. Tomorrow or next day they will be here.","Last night, I hear, they stayed in Stony Stratford. Tonight they will rest in Northhampton. They’ll be here tomorrow or the next day."
I long with all my heart to see the prince.,I’m dying to see the prince. I hope he’s grown a lot since I last saw him.
But I hear no; they say my son of York Has almost overta'en him in his growth.,But I hear he hasn’t. They say my son York has almost passed him in height.
"Ay, mother, but I would not have it so.","Yes, mother, but I wish I hadn’t."
"Why, my young cousin? It is good to grow.","Why, dear child? It’s good to grow."
"My uncle Rivers talked how I did grow More than my brother: “Ay,” quoth my uncle Gloucester, “Small herbs have grace; great weeds do grow apace.” And since, methinks I would not grow so fast","Grandmother, one night when we were eating dinner, my uncle Rivers mentioned that I had grown more than my brother. “Yes,” said my uncle Gloucester, “Small plants are graceful, while ugly weeds grow fast.” And since then, I’ve wished I wouldn’t grow so fast, because sweet flowers are slow while the weeds grow in a hurry."
"Good faith, good faith, the saying did not hold In him that did object the same to thee! He was the wretched’st thing when he was young, So long a-growing and so leisurely,","Well, it certainly wasn’t true for Richard! As a child, he took such a long time to grow up that, according to his rule, he should have grown up into a gracious adult."
"And so no doubt he is, my gracious madam.","And no doubt he is, gracious madam."
"I hope he is, but yet let mothers doubt.","I hope he is, but mothers get to have their doubts."
"Now, by my troth, if I had been remembered, I could have given my uncle’s grace a flout","Hey, if I’d remembered something about him, I could have had a good comeback for my uncle, touching on his growth worse than he touched on mine."
"How, my pretty York? I prithee let me hear it.","What would you have said, my young York? Do tell."
"Marry, they say my uncle grew so fast That he could gnaw a crust at two hours old. 'Twas full two years ere I could get a tooth.","Indeed, they say my uncle grew so fast that he could gnaw on a crust of bread when he was two hours old. It took me two years before I had a single tooth. Grandmother, this would have been a biting joke."
"I prithee, pretty York, who told thee this?","Pretty York, who told you about his teeth?"
"Grandam, his nurse.","His nurse, grandmother."
"His nurse? Why, she was dead ere thou wast born.","His nurse? Why, she was dead before you were even born."
"If ’twere not she, I cannot tell who told me.","Well, if it wasn’t her, I don’t know."
"A parlous boy! Go to, you are too shrewd.","A mischievous child. Come, come, you are too clever for your own good."
"Good madam, be not angry with the child.","Good lady, don’t be angry with the child."
Pitchers have ears.,Little pitchers have big ears.
Here comes a messenger. —What news?,Here comes a messenger. What’s the news?
"Such news, my lord, as grieves me to report.","My lord, it’s news I wish I didn’t have to report."
How doth the prince?,How’s the prince?
"Well, madam, and in health.","He’s fine and healthy, madam."
What is thy news then?,What is your news?
"Lord Rivers and Lord Grey are sent to Pomfret, And, with them, Sir Thomas Vaughan, prisoners.",Lord Rivers and Lord Grey have been imprisoned in Pomfret. Pomfret was a castle in northern England used for political executions; Richard II was killed there. Sir Thomas Vaughan was a chief member of Prince Edward’s court. Pomfret. So has Sir Thomas Vaughan.
Who hath committed them?,Who sent them there?
"The mighty dukes, Gloucester and Buckingham.",The powerful dukes Gloucester and Buckingham.
For what offence?,What did they do wrong?
"The sum of all I can, I have disclosed. Why, or for what, the nobles were committed","I’ve told you everything I know. Why the nobles were imprisoned, and on what charges, I don’t know, my gracious lord."
"Ay me! I see the ruin of my house. The tiger now hath seized the gentle hind. Insulting tyranny begins to jut Upon the innocent and aweless throne. I see, as in a map, the end of all.","Oh no! I see the downfall of my family. The tiger has seized the gentle deer: a tyrant has begun to attack the weak, innocent king. Welcome, destruction, blood, and massacre! I can see how all this will end as clearly as if I was looking at a map."
"Accursèd and unquiet wrangling days, How many of you have mine eyes beheld? My husband lost his life to get the crown, For me to joy, and weep, their gain and loss. And being seated, and domestic broils Clean overblown, themselves the conquerors Make war upon themselves, brother to brother, And frantic outrage, end thy damnèd spleen, Or let me die, to look on death no more.","How many times have I had to live through cursed times of violent struggle? My husband lost his life to get the crown, and my sons' fortunes have been tossed up and down, leaving me to rejoice over their victories and weep over their losses. And once one of them achieved the throne and had taken care of domestic quarrels, they made war among themselves. It’s a preposterous outrage. Let it end, or let me die so I won’t have to watch any more of it."
"(to YORK) Come, come, my boy. We will to sanctuary. Madam, farewell.","(to YORK) Come, my boy, let’s go to sanctuary Taking “sanctuary” meant going into a church, where for a certain length of time people could be free from civil authority. sanctuary . Madam, farewell."
"Stay, I will go with you","Wait, I’ll go with you."
You have no cause.,You have no reason to.
"(to QUEEN ELIZABETH) My gracious lady, go, And thither bear your treasure and your goods. For my part, I’ll resign unto your Grace As well I tender you and all of yours. Go. I’ll conduct you to the sanctuary.","(to QUEEN ELIZABETH) My gracious lady, go, and take your money and belongings The archbishop had both religious and civic duties. By assigning the Seal to the queen, he’s suggesting that he will treat her, not her son (or her brother in-law Richard), as the lawful monarch. It’s not really the Archbishop’s role, though, to reassign the Seal. Only the king can do that. belongings with you. For my part, I’ll reassign the Great Seal of England to you and will take it upon myself to protect you. Come, I’ll conduct you to the sanctuary."
"Welcome, sweet prince, to London, to your chamber.","Welcome, sweet prince, to London, the capital of the king."
"(to PRINCE) Welcome, dear cousin, my thoughts' sovereign. The weary way hath made you melancholy.","Welcome, dear nephew, king of all my thoughts. The tiring journey seems to have made you gloomy."
"No, uncle, but our crosses on the way I want more uncles here to welcome me.","It wasn’t the journey itself, uncle, but the troubles we encountered that made it wearisome and dull. I want more uncles here to welcome me."
"Sweet prince, the untainted virtue of your years Hath not yet dived into the world’s deceit; Nor more can you distinguish of a man Seldom or never jumpeth with the heart. Those uncles which you want were dangerous. Your Grace attended to their sugared words But looked not on the poison of their hearts.","Sweet prince, you’re just an innocent child. You don’t really understand how capable people are of trickery. All you know is what a man shows you, which has little to do with what he’s really thinking. Those uncles that you wish were here were dangerous. Your Grace heard their saccharine words, but didn’t take note of their poisonous intentions. God protect you from them and from other false friends!"
"God keep me from false friends, but they were none.","God should keep me from false friends, but they weren’t false."
"My lord, the mayor of London comes to greet you.","My lord, the mayor of London is here to greet you."
God bless your Grace with health and happy days.,God bless your Grace with health and happy days.
"I thank you, good my lord, and thank you all.— Would long ere this have met us on the way. Fie, what a slug is Hastings that he comes not To tell us whether they will come or no!","Thank you, my good lord, thank you all. I thought my mother and my brother, York, would have met us on our way here long before now. And what a slug Hastings is that he hasn’t even arrived to tell us whether they’re coming!"
And in good time here comes the sweating lord.,"And, just in time, here comes the sweaty lord."
"Welcome, my lord. What, will our mother come?","Welcome, my lord. What, isn’t my mother coming?"
"On what occasion God He knows, not I, The queen your mother and your brother York Have taken sanctuary. The tender prince Would fain have come with me to meet your Grace,","God knows why, but your mother and your brother have taken sanctuary in Westminster Abbey. Your sweet brother wanted to come meet you, but his mother wouldn’t let him."
"Fie, what an indirect and peevish course Is this of hers! —Lord Cardinal, will your Grace Persuade the queen to send the duke of York Unto his princely brother presently?— And from her jealous arms pluck him perforce.","Damn, what a sneaky and spiteful course your mother is taking!—Lord Cardinal, will you please persuade the queen to hurry and send the duke of York here?—Go with him, Lord Hastings, and if she refuses, take the boy from her by force."
"My Lord of Buckingham, if my weak oratory Can from his mother win the duke of York, Anon expect him here; but if she be obdurate We should infringe the holy privilege Of blessèd sanctuary! Not for all this land Would I be guilty of so deep a sin.","My Lord of Buckingham, if my weak skills of persuasion convince his mother to part with the duke of York, you can expect him here shortly. But if she resists my mild pleas, let God in heaven forbid us from disobeying the holy laws of the sanctuary and taking the child from her. I wouldn’t commit so serious a crime for anything."
"You are too senseless obstinate, my lord, Weigh it but with the grossness of this age, You break not sanctuary in seizing him. The benefit thereof is always granted To those whose dealings have deserved the place This prince hath neither claimed it nor deserved it And therefore, in mine opinion, cannot have it. Then taking him from thence that is not there, You break no privilege nor charter there. But sanctuary children, ne'er till now.","You are too inexplicably stubborn, my lord, too stuck on ceremony. In these less dainty times, you’re not breaking the laws of sanctuary to seize him. It’s only a sanctuary for those who really need protection or those who are smart enough to claim they do. The prince has done neither; therefore, in my opinion, he isn’t really protected by sanctuary. You’re not breaking any holy laws to take him away. Often I have heard of “sanctuary men,” but until now I’ve never heard of “sanctuary children.”"
"My lord, you shall o'errule my mind for once.— Come on, Lord Hastings, will you go with me?","My lord, you’ve won me over this time. Lord Hastings, will you go with me?"
"I go, my lord.","I’m coming, my lord."
"Good lords, make all the speedy haste you may.",Go as fast as you can.
"Say, uncle Gloucester, if our brother come, Where shall we sojourn till our coronation?","Say, uncle Richard, if my brother comes, where will I stay till my coronation?"
"Where it seems best unto your royal self. If I may counsel you, some day or two Then where you please and shall be thought most fit For your best health and recreation.","Whatever seems best to you. If I can give you some advice, if I were you, I would stay in the Tower for a day or two. Then you can stay wherever best suits your health and entertainment needs."
"I do not like the Tower, of any place.— Did Julius Caesar build that place, my lord?","Of all places, I don’t like the Tower Julius Caesar conquered Britain,which then became a part of the Roman Empire. Tower . Didn’t Julius Caesar build it, my lord?"
"Which, since, succeeding ages have re-edified.","He started it, my noble lord, and succeeding generations rebuilt it."
"Is it upon record, or else reported Successively from age to age, he built it?","Is it on record that he built it, or is it just word of mouth?"
"Upon record, my gracious lord.","On record, my gracious lord."
"Methinks the truth should live from age to age, As ’twere retailed to all posterity, Even to the general all-ending day.","Well, I think that even if it weren’t on record, the truth would be remembered from one generation to the next—all the way to Doomsday."
"(aside) So wise so young, they say, do never live long.","(to himself) As the saying goes, “Those that are this wise when they’re this young won’t live long.”"
"What say you, uncle?","What did you say, uncle?"
"I say, without characters fame lives long. (aside) Thus, like the formal Vice, Iniquity, I moralize two meanings in one word.","I said, “When there are no written records, a person’s fame lasts for a long time.” (to himself) Like Injustice Iniquity, or injustice/wickedness,was a common figure in medieval morality plays, which often personified the Seven Deadly Sins. Like Richard, Iniquity favors double talk to serve his own wicked purposes. Injustice , I get two meanings out of one word."
"That Julius Caesar was a famous man. His wit set down to make his valor live. Death makes no conquest of this conqueror, For now he lives in fame, though not in life. I’ll tell you what, my cousin Buckingham—","That Julius Caesar was a famous man. His courage helped his cleverness, and his cleverness made sure that his reputation for being courageous outlived him. Death didn’t conquer this conqueror, for he lives on in his fame, even though he’s dead. I’ll tell you what, my cousin Buckingham—"
"What, my gracious lord?","What, my dear lord?"
"An if I live until I be a man, I’ll win our ancient right in France again Or die a soldier, as I lived a king.","If I live to be a man, I’ll win France In the Hundred Years War ( – ), the English invaded France in an attempt to make good on hereditary claims to the French throne. France again or die a soldier, as honorably as I lived as a king."
(aside) Short summers lightly have a forward spring.,"(to himself) As the saying goes, “Short summers often have an early spring.” This smarty-pants won’t live long."
Now in good time here comes the duke of York.,"Making good time, here’s the duke of York."
"Richard of York, how fares our loving brother?","Richard of York, how are you doing, my loving brother?"
"Well, my dread lord—so must I call you now.","Very well, my supreme lord—that’s what I have to call you now."
"Ay, brother, to our grief, as it is yours. Too late he died that might have kept that title,","Yes, brother, I feel bad about that, too. The man who might have kept that title died too soon, and now it isn’t worth nearly as much."
"How fares our cousin, noble Lord of York?","How’s my nephew doing, noble lord of York?"
"I thank you, gentle uncle. O, my lord, You said that idle weeds are fast in growth. The prince my brother hath outgrown me far.","Thank you for asking, uncle. Oh, my lord, you once said that lazy weeds grow fast. The prince has far outgrown me."
"He hath, my lord.","He has, my lord."
And therefore is he idle?,Does that mean he’s lazy?
"O, my fair cousin, I must not say so.","Oh, my handsome nephew, I must not say that."
Then is he more beholding to you than I.,"In that case, he’s more obliged to you than I am."
"He may command me as my sovereign,","He may command me as my king, but you still have power over me as a relative."
"I pray you, uncle, give me this dagger.","Uncle, please give me your dagger."
"My dagger, little cousin? With all my heart.","My dagger, little nephew? With all my heart."
"A beggar, brother?","Are you begging, brother?"
"Of my kind uncle, that I know will give,","From my kind uncle, who I know will give it to me, especially as it’s not worth much."
A greater gift than that I’ll give my cousin.,"I’ll give you a greater gift than that, nephew."
"A greater gift? O, that’s the sword to it.",A greater gift? That must mean a sword.
"Ay, gentle cousin, were it light enough.","Yes, gentle cousin, if it were light enough for you."
"O, then I see you will part but with light gifts.","Oh, I see, you will only part with lightweight presents. For more important things, you’ll say no."
It is too heavy for your Grace to wear.,A sword’s too heavy for you to wear.
"I weigh it lightly, were it heavier.",I wouldn’t think much of it even if it were heavier.
"What, would you have my weapon, little lord?","What, do you want to wear my weapon, little lord?"
"I would, that I might thank you as you call me.","I do, so I can thank you for what you called me."
How?,What’s that?
Little.,“Little.”
"My lord of York will still be cross in talk. Uncle, your Grace knows how to bear with him.","The lord of York is always a bit perverse in his chatter. But, uncle, you know how to bear with him."
"You mean, to bear me, not to bear with me.— Because that I am little, like an ape, He thinks that you should bear me on your shoulders.","You mean, to bear me, not to bear with me. Uncle, my brother makes fun of both of us. Because I’m little, like an ape Professional jesters often carried apes on their shoulders. York may also be suggesting that Richard’s humpback would provide a perfect spot for an ape to perch. ape , he thinks you should bear me on your shoulders, like a fool."
"(aside) With what a sharp-provided wit he reasons! To mitigate the scorn he gives his uncle, So cunning and so young is wonderful.","(to himself) What a sharp mind this boy has! To make up for his scorn toward his uncle, he makes fun of himself as well. It’s amazing that he’s so cunning at his age."
"(to PRINCE) My lord, will ’t please you pass along? Myself and my good cousin Buckingham Will to your mother, to entreat of her","(to PRINCE) My lord, will you please continue on your way to the Tower? My good cousin Buckingham and I will go to your mother and ask her to meet you there."
"(to PRINCE) What, will you go unto the Tower, my lord?","(to PRINCE) What, you’re going to the Tower, my lord?"
My lord protector needs will have it so.,"My protector, Richard, insists on it."
I shall not sleep in quiet at the Tower.,I can’t sleep quietly in the Tower.
"Why, what should you fear?","Why, what are you afraid of?"
My grandam told me he was murdered there.,My uncle Clarence’s angry ghost. My grandmother told me he was murdered there.
I fear no uncles dead.,I’m not afraid of dead uncles.
"Nor none that live, I hope.","Nor living ones, I hope."
"An if they live, I hope I need not fear. Thinking on them, go I unto the Tower.","Well, I hope not. (to YORK) But come, my lord. With a heavy heart, thinking about my dead uncles, I will go to the Tower."
"Think you, my lord, this little prating York Was not incensèd by his subtle mother To taunt and scorn you thus opprobriously?","Richard, don’t you think this chattering little York was encouraged to taunt you by his sneaky mother in that outrageous way?"
"Bold, quick, ingenious, forward, capable. He is all the mother’s, from the top to toe.","No doubt, no doubt. Oh, he’s a dangerously clever boy—bold, quick-witted, capable. He’s his mother’s child from head to toe."
"Well, let them rest.—Come hither, Catesby. Thou art sworn as deeply to effect what we intend Thou knowest our reasons, urged upon the way. What thinkest thou? Is it not an easy matter To make William Lord Hastings of our mind For the installment of this noble duke","Well, enough about them.—Come here, Catesby. You’ve sworn to participate in our plot and to keep it a secret. What do you think: wouldn’t it be easy to convince Lord Hastings to join us in installing Richard as king of England?"
"He, for his father’s sake, so loves the prince That he will not be won to aught against him.",Hastings loved the prince’s father so much that we won’t be able to persuade him to do anything against the prince.
What think’st thou then of Stanley? Will not he?,What about Stanley? Won’t he join us?
He will do all in all as Hastings doth.,He’ll do whatever Hastings does.
"And, as it were far off, sound thou Lord Hastings How he doth stand affected to our purpose And summon him tomorrow to the Tower To sit about the coronation. Encourage him and show him all our reasons. If he be leaden, icy, cold, unwilling, Be thou so too, and so break off the talk, And give us notice of his inclination; Wherein thyself shalt highly be employed.","Okay, just do this, noble Catesby: sound out Lord Hastings, but make it seem as if you’re just mulling over the idea, that it hasn’t been firmed up yet. Invite him to come to the Tower tomorrow for the coronation ceremony. If he seems game to our plan, encourage him to join us and explain all our reasons. But if he’s resistant and chilly, then be like that too and break off the conversation. Let us know how he responds. Tomorrow we’re going to hold two separate meetings, one for those who are with us and one for those who aren’t. You’ll have a lot to do in these meetings."
"Commend me to Lord William. Tell him, Catesby, His ancient knot of dangerous adversaries Tomorrow are let blood at Pomfret castle, Give mistress Shore one gentle kiss the more.","Give my regards to Hastings, Catesby. Tell him the nest of dangerous enemies that plagued him for years will die tomorrow at Pomfret. And tell him to give Mistress After King Edward died, Mistress Shore became Hastings’s mistress. Mistress Shore one extra kiss to celebrate this good news."
"Good Catesby, go effect this business soundly.","Good Catesby, do your work well."
"My good lords both, with all the heed I can.","My good lords, I plan to."
"Shall we hear from you, Catesby, ere we sleep?","Will we hear from you before bedtime, Catesby?"
"You shall, my lord.","You will, my lord."
"At Crosby Place, there shall you find us both.",You’ll find us both at Crosby Place.
"Now, my lord, what shall we do, if we perceive Lord Hastings will not yield to our complots?","Now, my lord, what are we going to do if we find that Lord Hastings won’t go along with our plans?"
"Chop off his head. Something we will determine. The earldom of Hereford, and all the moveables Whereof the king my brother was possessed.","Chop off his head. Whatever we decide to do. And when I’m king, remember to ask me for the earldom of Hereford and all the possessions that go with it, which my brother the king used to own."
I’ll claim that promise at your Grace’s hands.,I look forward to that present.
And look to have it yielded with all kindness. We may digest our complots in some form.,"You’ll find I’ll give it to you very willingly. Come, let’s have an early dinner so that we have time to work out our plans."
"(knocking) My lord, my lord.","(knocking) My lord, my lord."
(within) Who knocks?,(offstage) Who’s knocking?
One from the Lord Stanley.,A messenger from Lord Stanley.
(within) What is ‘t o’clock?,(offstage)What time is it?
Upon the stroke of four.,Four o'clock in the morning.
Cannot my Lord Stanley sleep these tedious nights?,Can’t Lord Stanley sleep?
"So it appears by that I have to say. First, he commends him to your noble self.","I guess not—for good reason, as you’ll soon hear. First, he sends his regards."
What then?,And then?
"He dreamt the boar had razèd his helm Besides, he says there are two councils kept, And that may be determined at the one Which may make you and him to rue at th' other. If you will presently take horse with him And with all speed post with him toward the north To shun the danger that his soul divines.","And then he said to tell you that tonight he dreamed the duke of Gloucester cut off his helmet—that is, his head. Besides that, he says that two meetings are going to be held tomorrow, and something may be decided at one of them that may make you and him, who are at the other, sorry. He wants to know if instead of going to the meeting, you’ll get on your horse and ride north with him to get out of harm’s way."
"Go, fellow, go. Return unto thy lord. His Honor and myself are at the one, And at the other is my good friend Catesby, Where nothing can proceed that toucheth us Whereof I shall not have intelligence. And for his dreams, I wonder he’s so simple To trust the mock'ry of unquiet slumbers. To fly the boar before the boar pursues Were to incense the boar to follow us Go, bid thy master rise and come to me, And we will both together to the Tower, Where he shall see, the boar will use us kindly.","Go, man, return to your lord and tell him not to worry about the separate meetings. While he and I are at one, my loyal servant Catesby will be at the other, so nothing will happen that we won’t find out about. Tell your master there is no sound basis for his worries. And as for his dreams, I’m surprised he’s so foolish as to trust the fantasies of a restless night. If we flee from the boar before the boar even pursues us, we’ll only make the boar angry and suspicious, causing him to chase us when he never intended to. Tell your master to get up and come here, and we’ll go together to the Tower to meet the boar “The boar” refers to Richard, whose heraldic emblem, worn on his armor to indicate his noble lineage, was the boar. boar , who will treat us well, as he’ll see."
"I’ll go, my lord, and tell him what you say.","I’ll go, my lord, and tell him what you say."
Many good morrows to my noble lord.,"Good morning, my noble lord."
"Good morrow, Catesby. You are early stirring. What news, what news in this our tott'ring state?","Good day, Catesby. You’re up early. What news can you tell me in this fast-moving, unsteady state of ours?"
"It is a reeling world indeed, my lord, And I believe will never stand upright","Our world sure is spinning fast, my lord. I believe it won’t stop moving and stand upright till Richard wears the wreath of the realm."
How “wear the garland”? Dost thou mean the crown?,"What do you mean, “wears the wreath”? Are you talking about the crown?"
"Ay, my good lord.","Yes, my good lord."
I’ll have this crown of mine cut from my shoulders Before I’ll see the crown so foul misplaced.,I’ll have my head cut from my shoulders before I’ll see the crown so misplaced. But do you think that’s what he’s aiming for?
"Ay, on my life, and hopes to find you forward Upon his party for the gain thereof; And thereupon he sends you this good news, That this same very day your enemies,","Yes, I swear, and he hopes you’ll join his party to help. For that reason he sends you this good news—that this very day your enemies, the queen’s relatives, will die at Pomfret."
"Indeed, I am no mourner for that news, Because they have been still my adversaries. But that I’ll give my voice on Richard’s side To bar my master’s heirs in true descent,","Well, I’m not sorry to hear that, because they have always been my enemies. But the idea that I’d give my support to Richard and keep my master King Edward IV’s true heirs from the crown—never. God knows I’d die before I’d do that."
God keep your Lordship in that gracious mind.,"Well, let’s hope you stay in that noble frame of mind."
"But I shall laugh at this a twelve-month hence, That they which brought me in my master’s hate, I live to look upon their tragedy. I’ll send some packing that yet think not on ’t.","In a year, when things have calmed down, I’ll laugh about how those who got King Edward IV to hate me are now brought low. But as for now—before two weeks have gone by, I’m going to send some people packing. They have no idea what’s coming."
"'Tis a vile thing to die, my gracious lord, When men are unprepared and look not for it.","It’s a horrible thing to die when you’re not prepared for it, my gracious lord."
"O monstrous, monstrous! And so falls it out With some men else that think themselves as safe As thou and I, who, as thou know’st, are dear To princely Richard and to Buckingham.","Yes, monstrous, monstrous! That’s how it will be for Rivers, Vaughan, and Grey. That’s how it will be for some other men, too, who think they’re as safe as you and I, who are well-loved by noble Richard and Buckingham."
The princes both make high account of you— (aside) For they account his head upon the Bridge.,"Richard and Buckingham have a high opinion of you. (to himself) So high they’ll stick your head on the Bridge London Bridge, where heads of traitors were displayed on poles to serve as warnings to the general populace. Bridge ."
"I know they do, and I have well deserved it.","I know they do, and I certainly deserve it."
"Come on, come on. Where is your boar-spear, man? Fear you the boar, and go so unprovided?","Come on, come on, where is your spear for the boar, man? You’re afraid of the boar but you go around without your spear?"
"My lord, good morrow. —Good morrow, Catesby.— You may jest on, but, by the Holy Rood,","My lord, good morning. Good morning, Catesby. Go ahead and laugh at me, but by Jesus, I don’t like these separate meetings—I really don’t."
"My lord, I hold my life as dear as you do yours, And never in my days, I do protest, Was it so precious to me as ’tis now. Think you but that I know our state secure,","My lord, my life is as important to me as yours is to you, and it was never as precious to me as it is now. Do you think I would be feeling as triumphant as I am if I didn’t know that our situation was secure?"
"The lords at Pomfret, when they rode from London, Were jocund and supposed their states were sure, And they indeed had no cause to mistrust; But yet you see how soon the day o'ercast. Pray God, I say, I prove a needless coward! What, shall we toward the Tower? The day is spent.","When the lords who are imprisoned at Pomfret left London, they also were in a good mood and supposed their situation was secure. And they also had no reason to worry. But you see how soon the day got cloudy for them. Richard’s sudden, hateful attack on them makes me worry. I hope to God I’m proven wrong! Well, should we head to the Tower? The day is well on its way."
"Come, come. Have with you. Wot you what, my lord? Today the lords you talked of are beheaded.","Come on, let’s get going. You know what, my lord? Those men you just mentioned will be beheaded today."
"Than some that have accused them wear their hats. But come, my lord, let’s away.","They deserved to keep their heads more than some people who have managed to keep their positions. But come, my lord, let’s go."
Go on before. I’ll talk with this good fellow.,Go on ahead. I’ll talk with this good man.
"How now, sirrah! How goes the world with thee?","What’s up, man? How’s it going?"
The better that your Lordship please to ask.,"Better, since your lordship was nice enough to ask."
"I tell thee, man, ’tis better with me now Than when thou met’st me last where now we meet. Then was I going prisoner to the TowerBy the suggestion of the queen’s allies. But now, I tell thee—keep it to thyself— And I in better state than e'er I was.","I tell you, man, it’s better for me, too, than the last time we met here. Then I was on my way to the Tower, where I was going to be locked up thanks to the false charges of the queen’s allies. But now, I tell you—keep it to yourself, though—those enemies of mine are being put to death today, and I’m better than I’ve ever been."
"God hold it, to your Honor’s good content!","Well, let’s hope your good fortune continues!"
"Gramercy, fellow. There, drink that for me.","Thanks a lot, mister. Here, drink to me."
I thank your Honor.,God be good to you!
"Well met, my lord. I am glad to see your Honor.","A nice coincidence, my lord. I’m glad to see you."
"I thank thee, good Sir John, with all my heart. I am in your debt for your last exercise. Come the next sabbath, and I will content you.","I thank you, Sir John, with all my heart. I am indebted to you for your last sermon. By next week, I’ll be able to pay you."
I’ll wait upon your Lordship,"I’ll come to you, your Lordship."
"Your friends at Pomfret, they do need the priest; Your Honor hath no shriving work in hand.","What, talking with a priest, Hastings? Your friends at Pomfret, they’re the ones who need a priest. You, on the other hand, don’t have any confessions you have to make."
"Good faith, and when I met this holy man, The men you talk of came into my mind.","When I ran into this holy man, those men you mentioned did come to mind, in fact. Are you headed to the Tower?"
"I do, my lord, but long I shall not stay there. I shall return before your Lordship thence.","I am, my lord. But I won’t be there for long. I’ll be off before you are."
"Nay, like enough, for I stay dinner there.","Yes, probably, because I’m staying for lunch."
"(aside) And supper too, although thou know’st it not.—","(to himself) And for dinner, too, though you don’t know it. (to HASTINGS) Come, are you going?"
I’ll wait upon your Lordship.,"I’ll follow you, my lord."
"Sir Richard Ratcliffe, let me tell thee this: Today shalt thou behold a subject die For truth, for duty, and for loyalty.","Sir Richard Ratcliffe, let me tell you this. Today you will witness a person die for truth, duty, and loyality."
(to RATCLIFFE) A knot you are of damnèd bloodsuckers.,(to RATCLIFFE) God protect the prince from all of you. You’re a group of damned bloodsuckers!
(to RATCLIFFE) You live that shall cry woe for this hereafter.,(to RATCLIFFE) You’ll live to regret this.
Dispatch. The limit of your lives is out.,Hurry up. Your lives are over.
"O Pomfret, Pomfret! O thou bloody prison, Within the guilty closure of thy walls, Richard the Second here was hacked to death, And, for more slander to thy dismal seat, We give thee up our guiltless blood to drink.","Oh, Pomfret, Pomfret! Oh, you bloody prison, fatal and threatening to noble lords! Within these guilty walls, Richard II was hacked to death. And now, to add more blood to its name, we’re losing our innocent lives here."
"When she exclaimed on Hastings, you, and I, For standing by when Richard stabbed her son.","Now Margaret’s curse has fallen on our heads, for standing by and doing nothing when Richard stabbed her son."
"Then cursed she Richard, then cursed she Buckingham. Then cursed she Hastings. O, remember, God, And for my sister and her princely sons, Be satisfied, dear God, with our true blood, Which, as thou know’st, unjustly must be spilt.","She cursed Richard then. She cursed Buckingham then. She cursed Hastings then. Oh God, remember to hear her prayer for them, just as for us! But don’t kill my sister and her royal sons, be satisfied, dear God, with our blood, which is being spilled unjustly, as you know."
Make haste. The hour of death is expiate.,Hurry up. The hour of death is approaching.
They embrace Farewell until we meet in heaven.,"Come, Grey. Come, Vaughan. Let’s embrace (They embrace) and say goodbye until we meet again in heaven."
"Now, noble peers. the cause why we are met Is to determine of the coronation. In God’s name, speak. When is the royal day?","Now, noble lords, the reason we’re meeting is to determine the day the prince will be crowned. In God’s name, speak. When should the royal day be?"
Is all things ready for the royal time?,Is everything ready for that event?
"It is, and wants but nomination.",It is. All we have to do is name the day.
"Tomorrow, then, I judge a happy day.",Tomorrow’s a good day.
Who knows the Lord Protector’s mind herein? Who is most inward with the noble duke?,Who knows what the Lord Protector thinks? Who’s closest to him?
"Your Grace, we think, should soonest know his mind.","You, I think, would best know what he’s thinking."
"He knows no more of mine than I of yours, Or I of his, my lord, than you of mine.— Lord Hastings, you and he are near in love.","We know each other’s faces, but as for our thoughts, he doesn’t know any more about my thinking than I do about yours or his—or you do about mine. Lord Hastings, you and he are close."
"I thank his Grace. I know he loves me well. I have not sounded him, nor he delivered His gracious pleasure any way therein. But you, my honorable lords, may name the time, And in the duke’s behalf I’ll give my voice,","Thank you. I know he holds me dear, but I haven’t asked him about the coronation, and he hasn’t told me. But you, my noble lords, may name a time, and I’ll second it on the duke’s behalf, which I don’t think he’ll mind."
In happy time here comes the duke himself.,"Right on cue, here’s the duke himself."
"My noble lords and cousins all, good morrow. I have been long a sleeper; but I trust My absence doth neglect no great design","My noble lords and relatives, good morning. I slept in. But I hope I didn’t delay any important decisions."
"Had you not come upon your cue, my lord, William Lord Hastings had pronounced your part— I mean your voice for crowning of the king.","If you hadn’t shown up on cue, my lord, Lord Hastings was going to take your part—I mean, he was going to speak for you—in the crowning of the king."
"Than my Lord Hastings no man might be bolder. My lord of Ely, when I was last in Holborn I saw good strawberries in your garden there; I do beseech you, send for some of them.","No one may be bolder than my Lord Hastings. He knows me well and loves me well.—Ely, when I was last at your palace, I saw some great strawberries in your garden. I beg you, send someone to bring some of them."
"Marry and will, my lord, with all my heart.","Yes, my lord. With pleasure."
They move aside Catesby hath sounded Hastings in our business And finds the testy gentleman so hot As he will lose his head ere give consent Shall lose the royalty of England’s throne.,"Buckingham, I need to have a word with you. (drawing him aside) Catesby has sounded Hastings out and found the prickly gentleman so opposed to our plan that he actually said he would die before he’d agree to have his “master’s son,” as he put it so devotedly, lose the crown."
Withdraw yourself awhile. I’ll go with you.,"Move to the other room, my lord. I’ll come soon."
"We have not yet set down this day of triumph. Tomorrow, in my judgement, is too sudden, As else I would be, were the day prolonged.","We have not yet set the coronation day. Tomorrow, in my opinion, is too soon. I myself am not as well-equipped as I would be if the day were put off a bit."
Where is my lord the duke of Gloucester? I have sent for these strawberries.,"Where is my lord, the duke of Gloucester? I have sent for the strawberries."
"His grace looks cheerfully and smooth this morning. When that he bids good morrow with such spirit. I think there’s never a man in Christendom Can lesser hide his love or hate than he, For by his face straight shall you know his heart.",Richard is looking cheerful today. You always know he’s got some plan that pleases him when he says good morning with such gusto. I don’t think there’s a man under the sun who’s worse at hiding his love or hate than Richard. You know his feelings immediately just by looking at his face.
By any livelihood he showed today?,And what feelings did you see in his face today?
"Marry, that with no man here he is offended, For were he, he had shown it in his looks.","That he’s not angry with anyone here. If he were, he would have shown it."
"I pray God he be not, I say.",I pray to God he isn’t.
"That do conspire my death with devilish plots Of damnèd witchcraft, and that have prevailed Upon my body with their hellish charms?","Tell me, all of you, what punishment does a person deserve who conspires to kill me with witchcraft and who has already plagued my body with black magic?"
"The tender love I bear your Grace, my lord, To doom th' offenders, whosoe'er they be. I say, my lord, they have deservèd death.","Because I love your Grace, I say that whoever the offenders are deserve to die."
"Then be your eyes the witness of their evil. (shows his arm) Is like a blasted sapling withered up; And this is Edward’s wife, that monstrous witch, Consorted with that harlot, strumpet Shore, That by their witchcraft thus have markèd me.","Then see the evidence of their evil with your own eyes. (he shows his arm) Look how I’ve been bewitched! See how my arm has become like a withered tree-branch? This is the work of Edward’s wife, that monstrous witch, who is in league with that tramp Shore. They have used witchcraft to harm me."
"If they have done this deed, my noble lord—","If they have done this thing, my noble lord—"
"If? Thou protector of this damnèd strumpet, Talk’st thou to me of “ifs”? Thou art a traitor— Off with his head. Now by Saint Paul I swear I will not dine until I see the same.— The rest that love me, rise and follow me.","If? You lover of that damned whore, you’re talking to me of “ifs”? You’re a traitor.—Off with his head. By Saint Paul, I swear I won’t eat lunch until I see him beheaded. Lovell and Ratcliffe, make sure it gets done. The rest of you who love me, come with me."
"Woe, woe for England! Not a whit for me, For I, too fond, might have prevented this. Stanley did dream the boar did raze his helm, Three times today my foot-cloth horse did stumble, And started when he looked upon the Tower, As loath to bear me to the slaughterhouse. O, now I need the priest that spake to me!","I pity England, but not myself. I was too foolish. I might have prevented this. Stanley dreamed the boar beheaded him, and I laughed and refused to flee with him. Three times today my horse stumbled and started when he looked in the direction of the Tower, as if he hated to carry me to this slaughterhouse. Oh, now I really need that priest who spoke to me today!"
"As too triumphing, how mine enemies Today at Pomfret bloodily were butchered, And I myself secure in grace and favor. O Margaret, Margaret, now thy heavy curse","And I regret having bragged to the messenger about how my enemies were being butchered at Pomfret while I, as I said, was in good standing with Richard. Oh Margaret, Margaret, your heavy curse has now landed on poor Hastings’s miserable head!"
"Come, come, dispatch. The duke would be at dinner. Make a short shrift. He longs to see your head.",Hurry up—the duke wants to eat his dinner. Make your confession short. He’s eager to see your head.
"O momentary grace of mortal men, Which we more hunt for than the grace of God! Lives like a drunken sailor on a mast, Ready with every nod to tumble down Into the fatal bowels of the deep.","We spend more time seeking out the fleeting glories of this temporary world than looking to the permanent grace of God! Anyone who builds his hopes on air lives like a drunken sailor hanging on a mast, ready with every dizzy nod of his head to tumble to the bottom of the sea. The things we worry about, like good looks and possessions, aren’t lasting, and they don’t matter."
"Come, come, dispatch. 'Tis bootless to exclaim.","Come, come, hurry up. It’s pointless to talk now."
"I prophesy the fearfull’st time to thee That ever wretched age hath looked upon.— Come, lead me to the block. Bear him my head. They smile at me that shortly shall be dead.","Oh bloody Richard! Miserable England, I foresee for you the most frightening time you have ever experienced.—Come, lead me to the block. Bring him my head. Those who smile at it will soon be dead themselves."
"Come, cousin, canst thou quake and change thy color, Murder thy breath in the middle of a word, And then begin again, and stop again, As if thou wert distraught and mad with terror?","Tell me, cousin, I need to know if you can shake like you’ve got a fever, turn pale all of a sudden, and stop speaking in the middle of a word—as if you were driven crazy with fear."
"Speak, and look back, and pry on every side, Tremble and start at wagging of a straw, Intending deep suspicion. Ghastly looks Are at my service, like enforcèd smiles, At any time to grace my stratagems. But what, is Catesby gone?","Oh please, I can imitate the best tragic actor around. I can speak and then look all around, and tremble, and start at a mere piece of straw as if I were paranoid. Frightening looks are also at my service, as are fake smiles. Anytime I need them, they’re waiting to do my bidding. But has Catesby gone?"
"He is; and see, he brings the mayor along.","He has. But here he is, back with the mayor."
Lord Mayor—,Lord Mayor—
Look to the drawbridge there!,Watch out for the drawbridge Richard and Buckingham are pretending they are under attack. drawbridge over there!
"Hark, a drum!",Listen! A drum!
"Catesby, o'erlook the walls.","Catesby, look over the top of these walls to see if anyone’s there."
"Lord Mayor, the reason we have sent—","Lord Mayor, the reason we have sent—"
Look back! Defend thee! Here are enemies.,Look behind you! Defend yourself! There are enemies here.
God and our innocence defend and guard us!,God defend and guard us innocents against them!
"Be patient. They are friends, Ratcliffe and Lovell.",Stay calm. They’re friends—Ratcliffe and Lovell.
"Here is the head of that ignoble traitor, The dangerous and unsuspected Hastings.","Here’s the head of that notorious traitor, the dangerous and unsuspected Hastings."
"So dear I loved the man that I must weep. That breathed upon this earth a Christian; Made him my book, wherein my soul recorded The history of all her secret thoughts. So smooth he daubed his vice with show of virtue I mean his conversation with Shore’s wife— He lived from all attainder of suspects.","I loved this man so much it makes me weep. I took him to be the plainest, most harmless Christian on earth. He was the book in which I recorded all of my most secret thoughts. He was so slick in covering over his plans that if it hadn’t been for his love affair with Shore’s wife, I would never have suspected him."
"Well, well, he was the covert’st sheltered traitor That ever lived.— Were ’t not that by great preservation We live to tell it, that subtle traitor This day had plotted, in the council house To murder me and my good Lord of Gloucester?","Well, well, he was the most covert traitor who ever lived. Would you believe, if we hadn’t caught him, this subtle traitor would have murdered the Lord of Gloucester and me in the council room today?"
Had he done so?,He would have?
"What, think you we are Turks or infidels? Or that we would, against the form of law, Proceed thus rashly in the villain’s death, But that the extreme peril of the case, Enforced us to this execution?","What, do you think we’re Turks or savages, instead of Christians? You think we would have disobeyed the law and proceeded to kill this villain if England’s peace and our own lives hadn’t been at stake?"
"Now fair befall you! He deserved his death, And your good Graces both have well proceeded To warn false traitors from the like attempts.","I hope nothing else like this ever happens to you! This man deserved his death. And you, my good lords, were right to warn other traitors from trying the same."
"After he once fell in with Mistress Shore. Yet had we not determined he should die Until your Lordship came to see his end (Which now the loving haste of these our friends, Because, my lord, I would have had you heard The traitor speak, and timorously confess The manner and the purpose of his treasons, That you might well have signified the same Misconstrue us in him, and wail his death.","I didn’t expect any better from him once he got involved with Mistress Shore. But we had decided that he shouldn’t die until you were able to come witness his execution. (Which was prevented by the haste of our friends, Lovell and Ratcliffe here, who went against what we intended somewhat in their hurry to protect us). If you could have heard the traitor speak for himself and confess the exact way he planned to murder us, you could have told the citizens what terrible intentions he had, though now they’re likely to misconstrue what we did and wail over his death."
"But, my good lord, your Graces' words shall serve As well as I had seen and heard him speak; And do not doubt, right noble princes both, With all your just proceedings in this case.","But, my good lord, the words of you and Lord Buckingham are as trustworthy to me as if I had seen and heard him speak myself. And do not doubt, you honest, noble princes, that I’ll let our citizens know how fairly you proceeded in this case."
And to that end we wished your Lordship here T' avoid the censures of the carping world.,"That is exactly why we wanted you here, your lordship—to avoid the public carping and complaints."
"Which since you come too late of our intent, And so, my good Lord Mayor, we bid farewell.","But since you’ve come too late to see the execution as we intended, at least let people know what you hear we intended. And so, good Lord Mayor, we bid you goodbye."
"Go, after, after, cousin Buckingham. The mayor towards Guildhall hies him in all post. There, at your meetest vantage of the time, Tell them how Edward put to death a citizen Only for saying he would make his son Heir to the Crown—meaning indeed his house, Which, by the sign thereof, was termèd so. And bestial appetite in change of lust, Which stretched to their servants, daughters, wives, Even where his raging eye or savage heart, Without control, lusted to make his prey. Tell them when that my mother went with child Of that insatiate Edward, noble York My princely father then had wars in France, And, by true computation of the time, Which well appearèd in his lineaments, Being nothing like the noble duke my father. Yet touch this sparingly, as ’twere far off, Because, my lord, you know my mother lives.","Follow him, Buckingham. He’s traveling at a gallop to the London meeting hall. There, as soon as you have a chance, drop the hint that Edward’s children are bastards. Tell the citizens how Edward put to death a citizen just because the citizen said he was going to make his own son “heir to the crown”—when all the citizen meant was that he owned a tavern called “the Crown” and was going to leave it to his son. And then point out what a lech Edward was and what a bestial appetite he had for women, which touched even the citizens' own servants, daughters, and wives. There was no limit to what his lustful eye and savage heart would prey on. And, if you need to, approach the subject of me: tell them that when my mother became pregnant with the insatiable Edward, my noble father was fighting in France. With a little calculating, it’s obvious that Edward is not in fact my father’s child—not a surprising revelation if you consider how my father the noble duke looked nothing like this man. But only hint at this vaguely, because, as you know, my mother’s still alive."
"As if the golden fee for which I plead Were for myself. And so, my lord, adieu.","Don’t worry, my lord, I’ll be as eloquent as if the golden crown I’m pleading for were for myself. Goodbye, my lord."
"If you thrive well, bring them to Baynard’s Castle, Where you shall find me well accompanied","If things go well, bring the crowd to Baynard’s Baynard’s Castle was another of Richard’s London estates. Baynard’s Castle, where I’ll be surrounded by priests and learned bishops."
I go; and towards three or four o'clock Look for the news that the Guildhall affords.,"I’m off. Around three or four o'clock, look for news from the meeting hall."
"Go, Lovell, with all speed to Doctor Shaw. (to RATCLIFFE) Go thou to Friar Penker. Bid them both","Lovell, go as fast as you can to Doctor Shaw. (to RATCLIFFE) Go to Friar Penker. Both of you, tell these men to meet me in less than an hour at Baynard’s Castle."
"Now will I go to take some privy order To draw the brats of Clarence out of sight, And to give order that no manner of person Have any time recourse unto the princes.",Now I’ll go inside and write out a secret order to keep Clarence’s brats out of sight and to forbid anyone whatsoever from seeing King Edward’s sons.
"This is the indictment of the good Lord Hastings, Which in a set hand fairly is engrossed, That it may be today read o'er in Paul’s. And mark how well the sequel hangs together: For yesternight by Catesby was it sent me; The precedent was full as long a-doing, And yet within these five hours Hastings lived, Untainted, unexamined, free, at liberty. That cannot see this palpable device? Yet who so bold but says he sees it not? Bad is the world, and all will come to naught When such ill dealing must be seen in thought.","Here’s the indictment of the good Lord Hastings, which has been written out in a clear hand, like any legal document, so it can be read aloud in public outside St. Paul’s Cathedral. And look how well this sequence of events holds together: after Catesby brought the indictment to me last night, I spent eleven hours copying it. The original took just as long to write out. So that’s twenty-two hours. And yet five hours ago, Lord Hastings was alive, untouched, free, at liberty. What a backward world we live in! Why, who’s so stupid that he can’t see through this fraud? But who’s so blind to the consequences of speaking out that he’ll admit what he knows? The world is a bad place, where you can’t speak what you know."
"How now, how now? What say the citizens?",So what did the citizens say?
"Now, by the holy mother of our Lord, The citizens are mum, say not a word.",It’s incredible—they didn’t say a word.
Touched you the bastardy of Edward’s children?,Did you mention that Edward’s children are bastards?
"And his contract by deputy in France; Th' unsatiate greediness of his desire And his enforcement of the city wives; His tyranny for trifles; his own bastardy, His resemblance being not like the duke. Withal, I did infer your lineaments, Being the right idea of your father, Both in your form and nobleness of mind; Your discipline in war, wisdom in peace, Your bounty, virtue, fair humility; Indeed, left nothing fitting for your purpose Untouched or slightly handled in discourse. I bid them that did love their country’s good Cry “God save Richard, England’s royal king!”","I did. I talked about how he was engaged to Lady Lucy Edward IV was engaged to Elizabeth Lucy and had a child with her before he married Elizabeth Grey. Lady Lucy , and how he was engaged to Lady Bona Edward sent Warwick to secure this French marriage and then backed out of it. Lady Bona 								through the help of the earl of Warwick. I spoke of the unquenchable greediness of Edward’s desires and the way he forced himself on the wives of Londoners. I mentioned the way he punished people harshly for minor offenses. I said he was not the son of the noble duke of York, because your father was in France when he was conceived, which explains why he doesn’t have anything in common with his father. And then I suggested that you were the spitting image of your father, both in the way you look and in the nobleness of your character. I went into all your victories in Scotland, your skill as a warrior, your wisdom in peacetime, your generosity, your goodness, and your exceptional modesty. Indeed, I left nothing out. And when my oration came to a close, I asked those who loved their country to cry, “God save Richard, England’s royal king!”"
And did they so?,And did they?
"No. So God help me, they spake not a word Stared each on other and looked deadly pale; Which when I saw, I reprehended them And asked the mayor what meant this willful silence. His answer was, the people were not used Then he was urged to tell my tale again: “Thus saith the duke. Thus hath the duke inferred”— But nothing spoke in warrant from himself. When he had done, some followers of mine own, And some ten voices cried “God save King Richard!” And thus I took the vantage of those few. “Thanks, gentle citizens and friends,” quoth I. ""This general applause and cheerful shout And even here brake off, and came away.","No, God help me, they didn’t say a word. Like silent statues or stones that breathed, they just gazed at each other and turned as pale as the dead. When I saw this, I scolded them and asked the mayor what this stubborn silence meant. He said that the people weren’t used to being spoken to except by the Recorder Recorder=a legal official Recorder . So I urged the Recorder to repeat my tale—you know, “The duke of Buckingham said this, Buckingham meant that,” but nothing on his own authority. When he was done, a few followers of my own at the far end of the hall hurled their caps in the air. Some ten voices cried, “God save King Richard!” I jumped on this slender opportunity and said, “Thank you, noble citizens and friends. This widespread applause and enthusiastic shouts make clear you stand behind Richard.” And then I broke off and quickly came away."
What tongueless blocks were they! Would not they speak? Will not the mayor then and his brethren come?,What blocks of wood! They wouldn’t say anything? Aren’t the mayor and his fellow citizens coming?
"The mayor is here at hand. Intend some fear; And look you get a prayer book in your hand And stand between two churchmen, good my lord, For on that ground I’ll make a holy descant. And be not easily won to our requests.","The mayor is here at hand. Pretend you’re afraid, my lord, and don’t speak until you’re pleaded with. And make sure to carry a prayer book in your hand and to stand between two priests, okay? Then I’ll have the grounds to build a holy sermon about why you should be king. But don’t be easily won over. Act like a virgin, always answering “No,” but taking it in the end."
"I go. An if you plead as well for them As I can say “nay” to thee for myself, No doubt we bring it to a happy issue.","I’m going now. If you’re as good at pleading to them as I am at saying no to you, this will definitely come to a happy end."
"Go, go, up to the leads. The Lord Mayor knocks.","Hurry, go up to the roof. The Lord Mayor is knocking."
I think the duke will not be spoke withal.,"Welcome, my lord. I’m twiddling my thumbs waiting for the duke to show up. I don’t think he wants to be disturbed."
"Now, Catesby, what says your lord to my request?","Here comes his servant. Now, Catesby, what does your lord say to my request?"
"He doth entreat your Grace, my noble lord, To visit him tomorrow or next day. Divinely bent to meditation, And in no worldly suits would he be moved To draw him from his holy exercise.","My lord, he asks that you please visit him tomorrow or the next day. He’s inside in prayer, with two reverend fathers. He doesn’t want to be disturbed in his holy work by any worldly requests."
"Return, good Catesby, to the gracious duke. No less importing than our general good, In deep designs, and matters of great moment Are come to have some conference with his grace.","Return to the gracious duke, good Catesby. Tell him that the mayor, some citizens, and I have come to confer with his grace in matters of great importance concerning the general good."
I’ll signify so much unto him straight.,"I’ll tell him right away, my lord."
"He is not lolling on a lewd love bed, But on his knees at meditation; Not dallying with a brace of courtesans, But meditating with two deep divines; But praying, to enrich his watchful soul. Happy were England would this virtuous prince Take on his grave the sovereignty thereof. But sure I fear we shall not win him to it.","Ah, my lord, this prince is nothing like Edward! He is not lolling in bed but on his knees in prayer. He’s not enjoying himself with a couple of prostitutes but studying with two learned priests. He’s not sleeping to fatten up his lazy body, but praying, to nourish his attentive soul. England would be lucky to have this virtuous prince as king. But I’m afraid we’ll never get him to agree to be king."
"Marry, God defend his grace should say us nay!",But God forbid he says no to us!
I fear he will. Here Catesby comes again.,I’m afraid he will. Here comes Catesby again.
"Now, Catesby, what says his grace?","What’s up, Catesby, what does your master say?"
"He wonders to what end you have assembled Such troops of citizens to come to him, He fears, my lord, you mean no good to him.","My lord, he wonders why you have assembled such troops of citizens to speak with him, since he had no idea they were coming. My lord, he’s afraid you mean him harm."
"Sorry I am my noble cousin should Suspect me that I mean no good to him. By heaven, we come to him in perfect love,","I’m sorry my noble brother is suspicious of me. By God, I’m here because I love him. Return and tell him so."
"When holy and devout religious men Are at their beads, ’tis much to draw them thence, So sweet is zealous contemplation.","When devoutly religious men are praying, it’s hard to draw them out of it, because they get lost in the wonder of their contemplation."
"See where his Grace stands, ’tween two clergymen.",See how he stands between two clergymen!
"To stay him from the fall of vanity; And, see, a book of prayer in his hand, True ornaments to know a holy man.— Famous Plantagenet, most gracious prince, And pardon us the interruption Of thy devotion and right Christian zeal.","Two props of virtue for a Christian prince, to prevent him from ever becoming vain. And, see, he has a prayer book in each hand, the signs of a holy man. Most gracious prince of the famous house of Plantagenet, pardon us for interrupting your righteous, Christian prayer. Please listen favorably to our request."
"My lord, there needs no such apology. I do beseech your Grace pardon me, Deferred the visitation of my friends. But, leaving this, what is your Grace’s pleasure?","My lord, you don’t need to apologize. I beg you to pardon me. I’ve been so intent on serving God that I’ve kept my friends waiting. In any case, what would you like?"
"Even that, I hope, which pleaseth God above And all good men of this ungoverned isle.","Only what, I hope, will please God above and all good men on this island, which currently has no king."
"That seems disgracious in the city’s eye, And that you come to reprehend my ignorance.",I suspect that I have committed some offence to the city and you have come to reprimand me for not knowing better.
"You have, my lord. Would it might please your Grace, On our entreaties, to amend your fault.","You have, my lord. I hope you’ll make up for it!"
Else wherefore breathe I in a Christian land?,"Why else would I live in a Christian country, if I can’t ask forgiveness for my faults?"
"Know, then, it is your fault that you resign The supreme seat, the throne majestical, The sceptered office of your ancestors, Your state of fortune, and your due of birth, To the corruption of a blemished stock, Whiles in the mildness of your sleepy thoughts, Which here we waken to our country’s good, The noble isle doth want her proper limbs— Her royal stock graft with ignoble plants, And almost shouldered in the swallowing gulf Of dark forgetfulness and deep oblivion; Which to recure, we heartily solicit And kingly government of this your land, Not as Protector, steward, substitute, Or lowly factor for another’s gain, But as successively, from blood to blood, For this, consorted with the citizens, Your very worshipful and loving friends, And by their vehement instigation, In this just suit come I to move your Grace.","Then you should know that we take fault with your resigning the supreme seat, the majestic throne, the sceptered office, of your ancestors—the power and greatness that destiny and your noble birth have handed you—to the wrong person. You aren’t respecting the lineage of your royal family. You’re lost in sleepy thoughts, and we have come to wake you to our country’s needs. This noble island has been compromised. She is scarred by the infamous deeds of King Edward IV. Her royal stock has been corrupted and nearly lost. We want that royalty remembered again. We heartily beg you, in all your goodness, to take upon yourself the responsibility and rule of this land, not merely as a servant, substitute, or other lowly agent of the king, but as the king himself. It is your birthright to be king. It’s for this reason that we are here—the citizens of England and your devoted friends. We strongly urge you on."
"Or bitterly to speak in your reproof Best fitteth my degree or your condition. If not to answer, you might haply think Tongue-tied ambition, not replying, yielded Which fondly you would here impose on me. If to reprove you for this suit of yours, So seasoned with your faithful love to me, Then on the other side I checked my friends. And then, in speaking, not to incur the last, Definitively thus I answer you: Your love deserves my thanks, but my desert Unmeritable shuns your high request. And that my path were even to the crown As the ripe revenue and due of birth, Yet so much is my poverty of spirit, So mighty and so many my defects, Being a bark to brook no mighty sea, Than in my greatness covet to be hid And in the vapor of my glory smothered. But, God be thanked, there is no need of me, The royal tree hath left us royal fruit, Which, mellowed by the stealing hours of time, Will well become the seat of majesty, And make, no doubt, us happy by his reign. The right and fortune of his happy stars, Which God defend that I should wring from him.","I can’t tell which is the better course of action, to leave in silence or to scold you. If I don’t answer, perhaps you’ll think I’m accepting the heavy responsibility you foolishly want to impose on me. But if I do speak and refuse your request, then I’m guilty of reprimanding my friends, who have been faithful and loving toward me. So, I’ll speak to make clear I don’t want the crown but also that I am grateful to you. Here is my definitive answer: thank you for your love, but I’m going to have to turn down your weighty request because I don’t deserve to be king. First of all, even if all the obstacles were eliminated and my path led straight to the crown—if it were truly my birthright—I would rather hide from my greatness than hide inside the greatness of the position itself and be smothered by it. My spirit is poor, and I have so many terrible defects that as king I would be like a little boat tossed about on a mighty sea. So, thank God, there is no real need for me, as I wouldn’t be able to help you much. The royal tree has left us other fruit, which, with time, will do just fine on the throne and make us all happy as king, I’m sure. Someone other than I has the right and the good fortune to be made king. God forbid that I snatch the crown from him."
"My lord, this argues conscience in your Grace, But the respects thereof are nice and trivial, You say that Edward is your brother’s son; So say we too, but not by Edward’s wife. For first was he contract to Lady Lucy— Your mother lives a witness to that vow— To Bona, sister to the king of France. These both put off, a poor petitioner, A care-crazed mother to a many sons, A beauty-waning and distressèd widow, Made prize and purchase of his wanton eye, Seduced the pitch and height of his degree To base declension and loathed bigamy. By her in his unlawful bed he got More bitterly could I expostulate, Save that, for reverence to some alive, I give a sparing limit to my tongue. Then, good my lord, take to your royal self If not to bless us and the land withal, Yet to draw forth your noble ancestry From the corruption of abusing times Unto a lineal, true-derivèd course.","My lord, what you’ve said makes clear you have a conscience, but your objections are trivial, given the circumstances. You say that Prince Edward is your brother’s son. We agree, but not by your brother’s wife. King Edward was going to marry Lady Lucy—your mother can vouch for that—and then he was betrothed to Bona, the King of France’s sister-in-law. But both of these were put off by Elizabeth Grey, a careworn mother of many children who had once been a beauty but was now a stressed-out widow long past her prime. Nevertheless, under pretence of asking a favor of him, she attracted his lustful eye and seduced him so thoroughly that he completely debased himself, committing adultery with her. It resulted in this Edward, whom we’re polite enough to call “Prince.” Out of respect for the living, I’ll restrain myself from telling you everything. But, my good lord, if you don’t care about this country, at least use your own pure lineage to rescue us from the current corruption of the royal line."
"Do, good my lord. Your citizens entreat you.","Yes, my good lord, your citizens beg you."
"Refuse not, mighty lord, this proffered love.",Don’t refuse the love we offer you.
"O, make them joyful. Grant their lawful suit.","Oh, make them joyful! Grant their law-abiding request!"
"Alas, why would you heap this care on me? I am unfit for state and majesty. I cannot, nor I will not, yield to you.","Alas, why would you heap all these responsibilities on me? I am unfit to rule and to be king. Please, don’t take it badly, but I cannot and will not give in to you."
"If you refuse it, as in love and zeal Loath to depose the child, your brother’s son— As well we know your tenderness of heart Which we have noted in you to your kindred And equally indeed to all estates— Yet know whe'er you accept our suit or no, Your brother’s son shall never reign our king, To the disgrace and downfall of your house. And in this resolution here we leave you.— Come, citizens. Zounds, I’ll entreat no more.","Perhaps you refuse our request out of love for your brother’s son. You don’t want to depose the child. We know how tender your heart is and what gentle, kind, womanly feelings you have for your relatives, as well as for people from all walks of life. But listen, if you won’t become king, we’ll just get someone else, to the disgrace and ruin of your family. We will not have your brother’s son as king. On this note, we’re leaving. Come, citizens. Damn it, I’m not going to beg anymore!"
"O, do not swear, my lord of Buckingham!","Oh, please don’t swear, my lord of Buckingham."
"If you deny them, all the land will rue it.","Call them back, my lord, and accept their request. If you refuse it, the whole country will regret it."
"Will you enforce me to a world of cares? Call them again. I am not made of stones, But penetrable to your kind entreaties,","Would you tie me to a whole world of worries? Well, call them back again. I am not made of stone; I am affected by all these kind pleas, though it goes against my conscience and my soul."
"Cousin of Buckingham and sage, grave men, Since you will buckle fortune on my back, To bear her burden, whe'er I will or no, I must have patience to endure the load; Attend the sequel of your imposition, Your mere enforcement shall acquittance me From all the impure blots and stains thereof, For God doth know, and you may partly see,","Buckingham, my brother, and you wise, serious men, since you intend to force me to take responsibility for these changing times, whether I want to or not, I’m going to have to be brave and endure the load. But if this imposition you’ve put on me happens to result in dark scandal or ugly reproach, the fact that you forced me to accept this should clear me from blame. God knows, and you may have noticed, I’m not to eager to take on this job."
God bless your Grace! We see it and will say it.,"God bless your Grace! We understand you’re just doing it for us, and we’ll be sure to say so."
"In saying so, you shall but say the truth.","If you say that, you’ll only be telling the truth."
"Then I salute you with this royal title: Long live Richard, England’s worthy king!","Then I salute you with this royal title: long live Richard, England’s worthy king!"
Amen.,Amen.
Tomorrow will it please you to be crowned?,Will you be crowned tomorrow?
"Even when you please, since you will have it so.","Whenever you want, since you’re the one who wants it."
"Tomorrow, then, we will attend your Grace, And so most joyfully we take our leave.","Tomorrow, then, we will wait on your Grace. Now we’ll take our leave—joyfully."
"Farewell, my cousin. Farewell, gentle friends.","(to the bishops) Come, let us get back to praying.—Farewell, my cousin; farewell, noble friends."
"Who meets us here? My niece Plantagenet Led in the hand of her kind aunt of Gloucester? Now, for my life, she’s wandering to the Tower, On pure heart’s love, to greet the tender prince.—","Who’s this? My granddaughter, with her kind aunt, the duchess of Gloucester, leading her by the hand? Now, on my life, the young child must be headed to the Tower to greet the young princes, whom she adores. Daughter, how nice to see you."
God give your Graces both A happy and a joyful time of day.,Good afternoon!
"As much to you, good sister. Whither away?","The same to you, good sister. Where are you going?"
"No farther than the Tower, and, as I guess, Upon the like devotion as yourselves,","Just to the Tower—I’m guessing, for the same reason you are: to salute the noble princes who are staying there."
"Kind sister, thanks. We’ll enter all together.","Yes, kind sister. We can all go together."
"And in good time here the lieutenant comes.— Master Lieutenant, pray you, by your leave, How doth the prince and my young son of York?","And here comes the warden, just in time. Officer, please tell us, if you will, how are the prince and my little son, York?"
I may not suffer you to visit them. The king hath strictly charged the contrary.,"They’re just fine, my dear madam. But I’m sorry—I’m not allowed to let you visit them. The king has strictly forbidden it."
The king? Who’s that?,The king? Who’s that?
"I mean, the Lord Protector.",I meant to say the Lord Protector.
The Lord protect him from that kingly title! I am their mother. Who shall bar me from them?,The Lord keep him from the title of king! Richard has set boundaries between my love and theirs? I am their mother. Who’s going to keep me from them?
I am their father’s mother. I will see them.,I am their father’s mother. I will see them.
"Their aunt I am in law, in love their mother. Then bring me to their sights. I’ll bear thy blame","I am their aunt, and I love them like a mother. So take me to see them. Officer, I’ll take the responsibility from you, and the blame too."
"No, madam, no. I may not leave it so. I am bound by oath, and therefore pardon me.","No, madam, no. I can’t do this. I am bound by oath, so please forgive me."
"Let me but meet you ladies one hour hence, And I’ll salute your Grace of York as mother (to ANNE) Come, madam, you must straight to Westminster, There to be crownèd Richard’s royal queen.","In just an hour from now, Duchess of York, I’ll be saluting you as the mother of two beautiful queens. (to ANNE) Come, madam, you must go straight to Westminster Abbey, where you will be crowned Richard’s queen."
"Ah, cut my lace asunder, Or else I swoon with this dead-killing news!","Oh, cut my bodice-staps so that my pent-up heart can have some room to breathe, or I’ll faint from this deadly news!"
"Despiteful tidings! O, unpleasing news!","Cruel, cruel news!"
"(to QUEEN ELIZABETH) Be of good cheer, mother. How fares your Grace?","(to QUEEN ELIZABETH) Cheer up, mother. How are you feeling?"
"O Dorset, speak not to me. Get thee gone. Thy mother’s name is ominous to children. If thou wilt outstrip death, go, cross the seas, And live with Richmond, from the reach of hell. Go, hie thee, hie thee from this slaughterhouse, And make me die the thrall of Margaret’s curse, Nor mother, wife, nor England’s counted queen.","Oh, Dorset, don’t waste your time talking to me. Leave. Death and destruction are following at your heels. Your mother’s name has become a threat to her own children. If you want to outrun death, go cross the sea to France and stay with Richmond Henry Tudor, the earl of Richmond, later to succeed Richard as King Henry VII. Richmond , out of the reach of hell. Go, get out of here, get out of this slaughterhouse. Otherwise you’ll just increase the number of the dead, and make me die the slave of Margaret’s curse, no longer a mother, a wife, or England’s queen."
"Full of wise care is this your counsel, madam. (to DORSET) Take all the swift advantage of the hours. In your behalf, to meet you on the way. Be not ta'en tardy by unwise delay.","Madam, your advice is wise and caring.—Dorset, take advantage of the time you have. I’ll write to my stepson Richmond on your behalf, so that he’ll meet you on the way. But don’t delay."
"O ill-dispersing wind of misery! O my accursèd womb, the bed of death! Whose unavoided eye is murderous.","O, this evil wind that spreads nothing but misery. O, my cursed womb—it’s a deathbed, really, since Richard came out of it. It has hatched a cockatrice The cockatrice was a mythical being that could kill with its gaze. cockatrice , whose gaze kills whatever it lands on."
"(to ANNE) Come, madam, come. I in all haste was sent.","(to ANNE) Come, madam, come. I was sent in a hurry."
"And I in all unwillingness will go. O, would to God that the inclusive verge Were red-hot steel to sear me to the brains! Anointed let me be with deadly venom, And die ere men can say, “God save the Queen.”","I go unwillingly. I wish to God that the golden crown that I’ll have to wear were red-hot steel and burned me straight through to the brain! I wish I could be anointed queen with deadly venom, not oil, and that I would die before anyone even had a chance to say, “God save the Queen!”"
"Go, go, poor soul, I envy not thy glory.","Go, go, poor soul. I don’t envy your position. If you want to make me happy, don’t wish yourself harm."
"No? Why? When he that is my husband now Came to me, as I followed Henry’s corse, When scarce the blood was well washed from his hands Which issued from my other angel husband O, when, I say, I looked on Richard’s face, This was my wish: be thou, quoth I, accursed For making me, so young, so old a widow; And, when thou wedd’st, let sorrow haunt thy bed; More miserable by the life of thee Than thou hast made me by my dear lord’s death. Lo, ere I can repeat this curse again, Within so small a time my woman’s heart And proved the subject of mine own soul’s curse, Which hitherto hath held my eyes from rest, For never yet one hour in his bed Did I enjoyed the golden dew of sleep, Besides, he hates me for my father Warwick, And will, no doubt, shortly be rid of me.","No? Why? The man I’m married to now came to me when he’d barely washed the blood off his hands from killing my first husband, that angel, as well as my husband’s sainted father, whose corpse I was following to burial. I’m telling you, when I looked at Richard’s face, this is what I wished: “I want you to be cursed for making me a widow so young. And when you get married, let sorrow haunt your bed. And I hope your wife—if any woman is crazy enough to marry you—is more miserable about the fact that you’re alive as you have made me by killing my husband!” And then what? Before I even had time to repeat the curse, my woman’s heart was taken captive by his sweet, slick words. I became the victim of my own curse. Since I married him, I have not had one hour’s sleep in his bed. Every night I’m awakened by his terrified Anne’s father, the earl of Warwick, fought on the opposite side from Richard and the other Yorkists in the wars between the Lancasters and Yorks. terrified dreams. It doesn’t matter if I sleep, though. He hates me because of who my father is. He will, no doubt, get rid of me soon."
"Poor heart, adieu. I pity thy complaining.","Poor dear, goodbye. I pity your situation."
No more than from my soul I mourn for yours.,No more than I do yours.
"Farewell, thou woeful welcomer of glory.",Goodbye. I know you’re unhappy with the glory of becoming queen.
"Adieu, poor soul that tak’st thy leave of it.","(to ELIZABETH) And goodbye to you, the poor soul who has to leave that glory behind."
"(to DORSET) Go thou to Richmond, and good fortune guide thee. (to ANNE) Go thou to Richard, and good angels tend thee. Go thou to sanctuary, and good thoughts possess thee. I to my grave, where peace and rest lie with me. Eighty-odd years of sorrow have I seen, And each hour’s joy wracked with a week of teen.","(to DORSET) Go to Richmond, and good luck. (to ANNE) You go to Richard. I hope good angels will protect you. (to QUEEN ELIZABETH) You take sanctuary in the Abbey and think good thoughts for us. I will go to my grave, where I can look forward to peace and rest. I have witnessed eighty-odd years of sorrow; for each hour of joy I’ve experienced, I’ve suffered a full week of misery."
"Pity, you ancient stones, those tender babes Whom envy hath immured within your walls— Rough cradle for such little pretty ones. Rude ragged nurse, old sullen playfellow So foolish sorrows bids your stones farewell.","Wait. Look back at the Tower with me. Please, you ancient building, take pity on those tender babes locked inside your walls by envious rivals! You are such a rough cradle for such little pretty ones. You are a rude, ragged nurse and an old, sullen playmate for such tender princes. Please treat my babies well. I know I must look foolish saying goodbye to a building, but I’m aching with sorrow."
Stand all apart. —Cousin of Buckingham.,Everyone stand aside.—Cousin Buckingham.
My gracious sovereign.,My gracious king.
Give me thy hand.,Give me your hand.
"Thus high, by thy advice But shall we wear these glories for a day, Or shall they last and we rejoice in them?","Because of your advice and your help, I have a high position now. But will I wear these honors for only a day or will I enjoy them for a long time?"
"Still live they, and forever let them last.",Let them last forever.
"Ah, Buckingham, now do I play the touch, Young Edward lives; think now what I would speak.","Oh Buckingham, now I’m going to test to see if you’re truly made of gold. Young Prince Edward is still alive—what do you think I’m going to say next?"
"Say on, my loving lord.","Go on, my loving lord."
"Why, Buckingham, I say I would be king,","Why, Buckingham, I say I want to be king."
"Why so you are, my thrice-renownèd lord.","Why, you are king, your highness."
Ha! Am I king? 'Tis so—but Edward lives.,Ha! Am I king? I guess I am. But Edward is still alive.
"True, noble prince.","True, noble prince."
"O bitter consequence That Edward still should live “true noble prince”! Cousin, thou wast not wont to be so dull. Shall I be plain? I wish the bastards dead, What sayest thou now? Speak suddenly. Be brief.","Oh, how bitter it is that Edward—the real “true, noble prince”—should still be alive! Cousin, you didn’t used to be so thickheaded. Shall I put it plainly? I want the bastards dead. And I want it done right away. What do you say? Speak now and to the point."
Your Grace may do your pleasure.,Your Grace can do whatever he wants.
"Tut, tut, thou art all ice; thy kindness freezes. Say, have I thy consent that they shall die?","Tut, tut, you’ve become rather icy. Your friendliness toward me seems to be freezing over. Tell me, do I have your consent to kill them?"
Before I positively speak in this. I will resolve you herein presently.,"Give me a little breathing space, my lord, a little pause to think. I’ll let you know my answer shortly."
"(aside to the other attendants) The king is angry. See, he gnaws his lip.","(so only the attendant nearest him can hear) The king is angry. See, he bites his lip."
And unrespective boys. None are for me That look into me with considerate eyes. High-reaching Buckingham grows circumspect.— Boy!,(to himself) I only want to deal with stupid fools and careless boys. I have no use for people who look at me insightfully. Ambitious Buckingham grows much too circumspect. Boy!
(coming forward) My lord?,My lord?
Know’st thou not any whom corrupting gold Will tempt unto a close exploit of death?,Do you know anyone who would kill someone for money?
"I know a discontented gentleman Whose humble means match not his haughty spirit. And will, no doubt, tempt him to anything.","My lord, I know one unhappy gentleman who has more pride than money. Money talks, and would very likely get him to do anything."
What is his name?,What’s his name?
"His name, my lord, is Tyrrel.","His name is Tyrrel, my lord."
"I partly know the man. Go, call him hither, boy","I know the man a bit. Go, bring him here, boy."
"(aside) The deep-revolving witty Buckingham Hath he so long held out with me, untired, And stops he now for breath? Well, be it so.","(to himself) The thoughtful, witty Buckingham will no longer be privy to my innermost thoughts. Has he held out for me for so long and without a moment’s doubt only to suddenly need some “breathing room”? Well, so be it."
"How now, Lord Stanley, what’s the news?",Look who’s here! What’s the news with you?
"Know, my long lord, To Richmond, in the parts where he abides.","You should know, my loving lord, I’ve heard that the marquess Dorset has fled to Brittany, to the earl of Richmond."
"Come hither, Catesby. Rumor it abroad That Anne my wife is very grievous sick. I will take order for her keeping close. Whom I will marry straight to Clarence' daughter. The boy is foolish, and I fear not him. Look how thou dream’st! I say again, give out That Anne my queen is sick and like to die. To stop all hopes whose growth may damage me.","Come here, Catesby. Spread the rumor abroad that Anne, my wife, is very sick. I will make sure she’s kept out of view. And find a poverty stricken gentleman who I can marry straightaway to Clarence’s daughter. Clarence’s son is dull-witted, so I’m not worried about him. Look at you, standing there in a stupor! I repeat, spread the rumor that Anne, my wife, is sick and likely to die. Hurry up because it’s absolutely crucial that I destroy anything that may damage my position."
"(aside) I must be married to my brother’s daughter, Or else my kingdom stands on brittle glass. Murder her brothers, and then marry her— So far in blood that sin will pluck on sin. Tear-falling pity dwells not in this eye.","(to himself) I must get married to my brother’s daughter Elizabeth of York, daughter of Queen Elizabeth and King Edward. She later married Henry Tudor, earl of Richmond. She was the grandmother of Elizabeth I and considered by Elizabethans to mark the start of the Tudor reign. daughter . Otherwise, my kingdom stands on glass. Murdering her brothers and then marrying her isn’t the most foolproof way to secure my position. But I’m steeped so deep in blood by now that one sin has to follow the next. I have no tears of pity for anyone."
Is thy name Tyrrel?,Are you Tyrrel?
"James Tyrrel, and your most obedient subject.",James Tyrrel—and your most obedient subject.
Art thou indeed?,Are you indeed?
"Prove me, my gracious sovereign.","Test me, my blessed king."
Dar’st thou resolve to kill a friend of mine?,Do you dare kill a friend of mine?
Please you. But I had rather kill two enemies.,"Yes, my lord, but I’d rather kill two enemies."
"Why then, thou hast it. Two deep enemies, Foes to my rest, and my sweet sleep’s disturbers, Tyrrel, I mean those bastards in the Tower.","Well, that’s what you get to do. Two great enemies, in fact, enemies to my peace of mind. Tyrrel, I mean those bastards in the Tower."
"Let me have open means to come to them, And soon I’ll rid you from the fear of them.","Give me access to them, and soon you won’t have to worry about them anymore."
"Thou sing’st sweet music. Hark, come hither, Tyrrel.","That’s music to my ears. Come here, Tyrrel."
"Go, by this token. Rise, and lend thine ear.","By this token, you’ll be admitted to their cell. Get up and listen to me."
"There is no more but so. Say it is done, And I will love thee and prefer thee for it.","That’s all there is to it. As soon as the deed is done, you will be in my favor and I will promote you."
I will dispatch it straight.,I’ll do it right away.
"My lord, I have considered in my mind","My lord, I have thought over the request you just made of me."
"Well, let that rest. Dorset is fled to Richmond.","Well, it doesn’t matter anymore. Dorset has fled to the earl of Richmond."
"I hear the news, my lord.","I heard the news, my lord."
"Stanley, he is your wife’s son. Well, look unto it.","Stanley, Richmond is your wife’s son. Get information from her."
"My lord, I claim the gift, my due by promise, Th' earldom of Hereford and the movables Which you promisèd I shall possess.","My lord, I’d want to have the gift you promised me on your honor: the earldom of Hereford and all the possessions that go with it."
"Stanley, look to your wife. If she convey Letters to Richmond, you shall answer it.","Stanley, pay attention to your wife’s doings. If she sends any letters to Richmond, you will be accountable to me for it."
What says your Highness to my just request?,"What do you say, your Highness, about my just request?"
"I do remember me, Henry the Sixth Did prophesy that Richmond should be king, When Richmond was a little peevish boy. A king, perhaps—","As I remember, Henry the Sixth prophesied that Richmond would be king when Richmond was only a foolish little boy. A king, perhaps—"
My lord—,My lord—
"How chance the prophet could not at that time Have told me, I being by, that I should kill him?",How is it that the prophet didn’t tell me at the time that I would kill him?
"My lord, your promise for the earldom—","My lord, your promise of the earldom—"
"Richmond! When last I was at Exeter, And called it Rougemont, at which name I started, Because a bard of Ireland told me once I should not live long after I saw Richmond.","Richmond! The last time I was in Exeter, the mayor kindly showed me the castle there and called it “ Rougemont The words “Rougemont” and “Richmond” were pronounced similarly, and both mean “red hill.” Rougemont .” The name startled me because an Irish poet once told me that I would die soon after seeing “Richmond.”"
My Lord—,My lord!
"Ay, what’s o'clock?","Yes, what time is it?"
I am thus bold to put your Grace in mind Of what you promised me.,I’m reminding your grace what you promised me.
"Well, but what’s o'clock?","Well, but what time is it?"
Upon the stroke of ten.,It’s almost ten o'clock.
"Well, let it strike.","Well, let it strike ten then."
Why let it strike?,Why “let it strike”?
"Because that, like a jack, thou keep’st the stroke Betwixt thy begging and my meditation. I am not in the giving vein today.",Because you’re like the lowborn fellow who strikes the bell—you keep interrupting my thoughts. I am not in the giving mood today.
"Why then, resolve me whether you will or no.","Well, then, let me know whether you will give me the earldom some other time."
Thou troublest me; I am not in the vein.,You’re bothering me. I’m not in the mood.
"And is it thus? Repays he my deep service With such deep contempt? Made I him king for this? O, let me think on Hastings and be gone","Is this really happening? Does he reward my dedicated service with such deep contempt? Did I work to make him king for this? Oh, let me remember what happened to Hastings and hurry to Brecknock Brecknock was Buckingham’s family estate in southeast Wales. Brecknock while I still have my head on my shoulders!"
"The tyrannous and bloody act is done, The most arch deed of piteous massacre That ever yet this land was guilty of. Dighton and Forrest, whom I did suborn Albeit they were fleshed villains, bloody dogs, Melted with tenderness and mild compassion, Wept like two children in their deaths' sad story. “O thus” quoth Dighton, “lay those gentle babes.” Within their alabaster innocent arms. Their lips were four red roses on a stalk, And in their summer beauty kissed each other. A book of prayers on their pillow lay, But O, the devil—”There the villain stopped; When Dighton thus told on: “We smotherèd The most replenishèd sweet work of nature That from the prime creation e'er she framed.” They could not speak; and so I left them both To bear this tidings to the bloody king.","The tyrant’s bloody request has been met. It was the most ruthless massacre this country has ever been guilty of. Dighton and Forrest, whom I hired to perform the butchery, are used to killing people, the bloody dogs. But they melted with tenderness and human compassion, weeping like children, when they described what they’d done. “The tender babes lay like this,” said Dighton. “Like this,” said Forrest, “with their innocent white arms around each other. Their lips, like four red roses on a stalk, touched. A prayer book lay on their pillow, which” said Forrest, “almost made me change my mind. But, oh, the devil”—there he stopped talking and Dighton took up where he left off: “We smothered the perfect, most sweet work of nature.” The two men were both destroyed by remorse. They couldn’t speak. So I left them to bring the news to the murderous king. And here he comes."
"And here he comes.—All health, my sovereign lord.","Here he comes.—Health to you, my king."
"Kind Tyrrel, am I happy in thy news?","Kind Tyrrel, will your news make me happy?"
"Beget your happiness, be happy then, For it is done.","If my doing what you told me to makes you happy, then be happy, because I did it."
But did’st thou see them dead?,But did you see them dead?
"I did, my lord.","I did, my lord."
"And buried, gentle Tyrrel?","And buried, noble Tyrrel?"
"The chaplain of the Tower hath buried them,","The Tower’s chaplain has buried them, but to tell you the truth, I don’t know where."
"Come to me, Tyrrel, soon at after-supper, When thou shalt tell the process of their death. Meantime, but think how I may do thee good, And be inheritor of thy desire.","Tyrrel, come back shortly after dinner and tell me the details of their deaths. In the meantime, think about how I can do you good and give you what you want. See you soon."
I humbly take my leave.,I humbly say goodbye.
"The son of Clarence have I pent up close, His daughter meanly have I matched in marriage, The sons of Edward sleep in Abraham’s bosom, And Anne my wife hath bid this world goodnight. At young Elizabeth, my brother’s daughter, And by that knot looks proudly on the crown, To her go I, a jolly thriving wooer.","I’ve locked up Clarence’s son and matched his daughter with a poor fellow. Edward’s sons have been carried off by the angels and Anne, my wife, has bid good night to the world. Now I go, a jolly, thriving wooer, to marry my brother Edward’s young daughter, Elizabeth, because I know Richmond has his eye on her. He wants to win the crown by way of marrying her."
My lord!,My lord!
"Good or bad news, that thou com’st in so bluntly?",Is the news good or bad that you enter without knocking?
"Bad news, my lord. Morton is fled to Richmond, And Buckingham, backed with the hardy Welshmen, Is in the field, and still his power increaseth.","Bad news, my lord. The Bishop of Ely has fled to Richmond, and Buckingham, backed by a hardy Welsh army, is on the march. His army is growing."
"Ely with Richmond troubles me more near Come, I have learned that fearful commenting Is leaden servitor to dull delay; Delay leads impotent and snail-paced beggary; Then fiery expedition be my wing, Go, muster men. My counsel is my shield. We must be brief when traitors brave the field.","Ely joining Richmond troubles me more than Buckingham and his quickly assembled army. Come, I’ve heard that frightened analysis only serves to delay action, and delay can lead to ruin. So my method is going to be to move as quickly as fire. Come, let’s gather an army. The best strategy is to head right to the battlefield. When traitors challenge us to fight, it’s best to act fast."
"So now prosperity begins to mellow And drop into the rotten mouth of death. Here in these confines slyly have I lurked To watch the waning of mine enemies. And will to France, hoping the consequence Will prove as bitter, black, and tragical. Withdraw thee, wretched Margaret. Who comes here?","So now the good times have ripened and grown rotten. I’ve lurked in the shadows here to watch the downfall of my enemies. I’ve been watching the terrible prologue to a scene that I hope will prove dark and tragic. I’ll head to France soon. It’s time to hide, wretched Margaret. Who’s coming?"
"Ah, my poor princes! Ah, my tender babes, If yet your gentle souls fly in the air And be not fixed in doom perpetual, Hover about me with your airy wings And hear your mother’s lamentation.","Ah, my poor princes! Ah, my tender babes, my flowers who didn’t even get a chance to bloom. If your gentle souls are still flying in the air and have not yet landed where they will remain forever, hover around me with your airy wings and hear your mother’s lament."
Hath dimmed your infant morn to agèd night.,"Hover about her and tell her she got what she deserved, with her children dead before their time."
"So many miseries have crazed my voice That my woe-wearied tongue is still and mute. Edward Plantagenet, why art thou dead?","I’ve been crazed with so many miseries that my tongue has tired of lamenting and gone mute. Edward Plantagenet, why are you dead?"
Edward for Edward pays a dying debt.,(to herself) One Plantagenet pays for the other. One Edward dies to pay a debt for the other Edward who died.
"Wilt thou, O God, fly from such gentle lambs And throw them in the entrails of the wolf? When didst thou sleep when such a deed was done?","Will you abandon such gentle lambs, God, and throw them to the wolves? Have you ever slept before while such a terrible deed was done?"
"(aside) When holy Harry died, and my sweet son.","(to herself) Sure—when my husband, holy Harry Harry = Henry VI Harry , died and when my sweet son died."
"(sitting down) Dead life, blind sight, poor mortal living ghost, Woe’s scene, world’s shame, grave’s due by life usurped, Brief abstract and record of tedious days, Unlawfully made drunk with innocent blood.","(sitting down) Sight has gone blind, life is as dead as a ghost. This is a mournful scene—it’s a shame to the world, when someone like me, who should have died long ago, still lives. As a short summary and record of an unbearable life, I’ll settle my restless bones on England’s lawful ground (sitting down), which broke the law when it got drunk on the blood of the innocent!"
"(sitting down beside her) Ah, that thou wouldst as soon afford a grave As thou canst yield a melancholy seat, O, who hath any cause to mourn but we?","(sitting down beside her) Oh, if only the earth would offer me not just a seat for mourning but a grave. Then I would bury myself, not just rest my bones. Oh, who has any reason to mourn except us?"
"(joining them) If ancient sorrow be most reverend, Give mine the benefit of seigniory, And let my griefs frown on the upper hand. Tell o'er your woes again by viewing mine. I had an Edward till a Richard killed him; I had a husband till a Richard killed him. Thou hadst an Edward till a Richard killed him;","If the oldest grief is the most revered, then mine should have the most weight here. Let my sorrow have the upper hand. If you can allow for comparison (sitting down with them), consider your losses next to mine. I had an Edward till a Richard killed him, and I had a Harry till a Richard killed him. On your side, you had an Edward till a Richard killed him, and you had the young Richard, York, till a Richard killed him. So, I guess we’re equal."
"I had a Richard too, and thou did’st kill him; I had a Rutland too; thou holp’st to kill him.","I had a Richard too—namely, my husband—and you killed him. I had my son Rutland, and you helped kill him."
"Thou hadst a Clarence too, and Richard killed him Then forth the kennel of thy womb hath crept That dog, that had his teeth before his eyes, To worry lambs and lap their gentle blood; That excellent grand tyrant of the earth, That reigns in gallèd eyes of weeping souls; Thy womb let loose to chase us to our graves. O upright, just, and true-disposing God, How do I thank thee that this carnal cur Preys on the issue of his mother’s body","You had a Clarence, too, and Richard killed him. Your womb let loose a hellhound that hunts us all to death. That dog, who was born with sharp teeth for lapping up the blood of lambs, who had teeth before he even had eyes, is the world’s worst tyrant, making the eyes of a whole kingdom red with weeping. He destroys God’s handiwork and will send us to our graves. Oh righteous God, how can I thank you enough that this meat-eating mutt preys on his mother’s children and forces her to join others in their grief!"
"O Harry’s wife, triumph not in my woes! God witness with me, I have wept for thine.","O Harry’s wife, do not triumph in my sorrow! With God as my witness, I swear I have wept for yours."
"Bear with me, I am hungry for revenge, And now I cloy me with beholding it. Thy other Edward dead, to quit my Edward; Young York, he is but boot, because both they Matched not the high perfection of my loss. Thy Clarence he is dead that stabbed my Edward, Th' adulterate Hastings, Rivers, Vaughan, Grey, Untimely smothered in their dusky graves. Richard yet lives, hell’s black intelligencer, Only reserved their factor to buy souls Ensues his piteous and unpitied end. Earth gapes, hell burns, fiends roar, saints pray, To have him suddenly conveyed from hence. Cancel his bond of life, dear God I pray,","Bear with me. I am hungry for revenge, and now I plan to gorge myself on it. Your son Edward, who stabbed my son Edward, is dead. To even the balance, your grandson Edward is also dead, with young York thrown in because both your grandsons aren’t equal to my one son. Your Clarence, who stabbed my Edward, is also dead. And the audience to this insane play—the adulterer Hastings, as well as Rivers, Vaughan, and Grey—have been sent early to their graves. Richard, a fiendish spy for hell itself, still lives, but only long enough to buy souls to send below. Soon, very soon, he will meet his ghastly and well deserved end. When he dies, the earth will gape open, hell will burn hotter, devils will roar, and saints will pray to get him out of here fast. I pray that God ends his life before I die, so I can say, “The dog is dead!”"
"O, thou didst prophesy the time would come That I should wish for thee to help me curse That bottled spider, that foul bunch-backed toad!","Oh, you prophesied that the time would come when I would want your help in cursing that humpbacked spider, that hideous toad!"
"I called thee then “vain flourish of my fortune.” The presentation of but what I was, The flattering index of a direful pageant, One heaved a-high, to be hurled down below, A mother only mocked with two fair babes, To be the aim of every dangerous shot, A sign of dignity, a breath, a bubble, A queen in jest, only to fill the scene. Where is thy husband now? Where be thy brothers? Who sues and kneels and says “God save the queen?” Where be the bending peers that flattered thee? Where be the thronging troops that followed thee? Decline all this, and see what now thou art: For joyful mother, one that wails the name; For queen, a very caitiff crowned with care; For she that scorned at me, now scorned of me; For she being feared of all, now fearing one; Thus hath the course of justice whirled about And left thee but a very prey to time, Having no more but thought of what thou wast To torture thee the more, being what thou art. Usurp the just proportion of my sorrow? Now thy proud neck bears half my burdened yoke, From which even here I slip my weary head And leave the burthen of it all on thee. These English woes will make me smile in France.","Back then, I called you “a poor, imitation queen,” a badly reproduced copy of what I was, a pretty prologue for the tragedy that was about to follow, a woman who was lifted high only to be hurled down to hell, a mother only teased with two beautiful children, who would soon die. I said you were a mere shadow of what a queen once was, a garish target to be aimed at again and again, an empty symbol of dignity without any substance, a mockery of a queen only there to fill in a role. And I was right, because where’s your husband now? Your brothers? Your two sons? Your source of joy? Who kneels at your feet now and says, “God save the Queen?” What noblemen are bowing and scraping to flatter you now? And where is your throng of followers? Once you’ve laid out all of these losses, it’s clear what’s left. In place of a happy wife, there’s a miserable widow. Instead of a joyful mother, here’s a woman who cries at the mention of her children. For one who bestows favors on others, here’s one who has to beg for favors. Instead of a queen, we have a poor woman with a crown of worries. She who mocked me now is mocked by me. She who once ordered everyone about is now obeyed by no one. Your fortune has fallen. Now you have only the memory of what you were, which tortures you when you consider what you’ve become. You once stole my position; now you get to have the grief that goes with it. Now like an ox, you carry half my heavy burden of grief—here, I’ll give you the rest. Farewell, York’s wife. Goodbye, queen of tragic misfortune. Your English sorrows will make me smile in France."
"O, thou well-skilled in curses, stay awhile, And teach me how to curse mine enemies.","You who are so skilled in cursing, stay awhile and teach me how to curse my enemies."
"Forbear to sleep the nights, and fast the days; Think that thy babes were sweeter than they were, And he that slew them fouler than he is. Bettering thy loss makes the bad causer worse. Revolving this will teach thee how to curse.","Don’t sleep at night, and don’t eat during the day. Compare what you’ve lost with what you suffer now. Remember your children as being sweeter than they actually were, and think of the man who killed them as worse than he is. Making your loss greater makes the person who caused it worse. Think like this all day, and you’ll learn how to curse."
"My words are dull. O, quicken them with thine!",My words are dull. Enliven them with yours!
Thy woes will make them sharp and pierce like mine.,Your misery will make them sharp and piercing like mine.
Why should calamity be full of words?,What good does it do to respond to catastrophe with a lot of words?
"Windy attorneys to their clients' woes, Airy succeeders of intestate joys, Let them have scope, though what they will impart Help nothing else, yet do they ease the heart.","Words are a lot of useless breath, like lawyers who won’t stop arguing for their sad clients, like a worthless inheritance, or like poor speech-makers who won’t stop speaking. But give words a chance. Though they won’t help in any other way, at least they make us feel better."
"If so, then be not tongue-tied. Go with me, And in the breath of bitter words let’s smother","If that’s true, then don’t be tongue-tied. Come with me, and let’s smother my fiendish son—who smothered your two sweet sons—in bitter words."
The trumpet sounds. Be copious in exclaims.,I hear his battle drums. Don’t stint on your words.
Who intercepts my expedition?,Who’s blocking the way?
"O, she that might have intercepted thee, By strangling thee in her accursèd womb,",The woman who might have blocked you from all the murders you’ve committed by strangling you in her cursed womb.
"Hid’st thou that forehead with a golden crown Where should be branded, if that right were right, The slaughter of the prince that owed that crown And the dire death of my poor sons and brothers?","Are you hiding your forehead with a golden crown, when, if there was any justice in this world, it should be branded with the murders you committed—your slaughter of the prince who held that crown, and of my sons and my brothers? Tell me, you villainous lowlife, where are my children?"
"Thou toad, thou toad, where is thy brother Clarence? And little Ned Plantagenet his son?","You toad, where is your brother Clarence and his son, little Ned Plantagenet?"
"Where is gentle Rivers, Vaughan, Grey?","Where are the noble Hastings, Rivers, Vaughan, Grey?"
Where is kind Hastings?,Where is kind Hastings?
"Let not the heavens hear these telltale women Rail on the Lord’s anointed. Strike, I say!","Play, trumpets! A call to arms, drums! Don’t let the heavens hear these chattery women abuse the Lord’s anointed king. Play, I say!"
"Either be patient and entreat me fair, Or with the clamorous report of war",Either be calm and polite or I’ll drown you out with the music of war.
Art thou my son?,Are you my son?
"Ay, I thank God, my father, and yourself.","Yes, I thank God, my father, and yourself."
Then patiently hear my impatience.,Then patiently listen to my impatience.
"Madam, I have a touch of your condition,","Madam, I’m a bit like you in that I can’t tolerate a tone of disapproval."
"O, let me speak!","Oh, let me speak!"
"Do then, but I’ll not hear.","Go ahead, but I won’t listen."
I will be mild and gentle in my words.,I’ll be gentle and mild.
"And brief, good mother, for I am in haste.","And brief, good mother—I’m in a hurry."
"Art thou so hasty? I have stayed for thee,","Are you that impatient? God knows I waited for you in anguish, pain, and agony when I gave birth to you."
And came I not at last to comfort you?,And didn’t I finally arrive to comfort you?
"No, by the Holy Rood, thou know’st it well. Thou cam’st on earth to make the earth my hell. A grievous burden was thy birth to me; Thy school days frightful, desp'rate, wild, and furious; Thy prime of manhood daring, bold, and venturous; Thy age confirmed, proud, subtle, sly, and bloody, More mild, but yet more harmful, kind in hatred. That ever graced me in thy company?","No, by God, you know perfectly well you arrived on earth to make it my hell. Your birth was incredibly painful; you were a fussy and difficult baby; as a schoolboy, you were frightening, wild, furious, and caused me despair; as a young man, you were daring, bold, and enterprising, and in your maturity, you have been haughty, bloody, and treacherous—both more mild and more harmful than before. So, what hour of comfort have I ever had in your company? Name one."
"Faith, none but Humfrey Hower, that called your Grace To breakfast once, forth of my company. If I be so disgracious in your eye, Strike up the drum.","I guess none except Humphrey Humphrey Hour is an obscure reference, though Shakespeare is probably playing off the expression, “to dine with Duke Humphrey,” which meant, “to go hungry.” Richard is saying, in effect, “The only comfort you ever had was an hour you had without me, at breakfast time when you were hungry.” Humphrey Hour, who once invited you to have breakfast without me. If I be such a disgrace in your eyes, let me march on and not offend you. Strike up the band!"
"I prithee, hear me speak.","Please, listen to me."
You speak too bitterly.,You’re too bitter.
"Hear me a word, For I shall never speak to thee again.",Just listen this once. I’ll never speak to you again.
So.,So be it.
"Ere from this war thou turn a conqueror, Or I with grief and extreme age shall perish And nevermore behold thy face again. Therefore take with thee my most grievous curse, Than all the complete armor that thou wear’st. My prayers on the adverse party fight, And there the little souls of Edward’s children Whisper the spirits of thine enemies Bloody thou art; bloody will be thy end. Shame serves thy life and doth thy death attend.","Either you will die as you should, before you’ve had a chance to win this battle, or I will die from grief and age and never look upon your face again. So, take with you my heaviest curse, which I hope wears you out in battle even more than your heavy suit of armor will. I pray that the little souls of Edward’s children will whisper to your enemies and promise them success and victory. You are violent, and your end will be violent. Your life was shameful, and let your death be, too."
"Though far more cause, yet much less spirit to curse Abides in me. I say amen to her.","Though I have far more reason, I don’t have as much energy to curse you. But I say amen to everything she said."
"Stay, madam. I must talk a word with you.","Wait, madam. I need to speak a word with you."
"I have no more sons of the royal blood For thee to slaughter. For my daughters, Richard, They shall be praying nuns, not weeping queens, And therefore level not to hit their lives.","I have no more royal sons for you to murder. As for my daughters, Richard, they will become praying nuns, not weeping queens. So don’t aim at them."
"Virtuous and fair, royal and gracious.","You have a daughter named Elizabeth, who is virtuous and beautiful, aristocratic and full of grace."
"And must she die for this? O, let her live, And I’ll corrupt her manners, stain her beauty, Slander myself as false to Edward’s bed, So she may live unscarred of bleeding slaughter, I will confess she was not Edward’s daughter.","And does she have to die for this? Oh, let her live, and I’ll ruin her manners and her beauty. So that she may live, I’ll say I cheated on Edward and that she is not really his child."
Wrong not her birth. She is a royal princess.,Don’t wrong her birth. She has royal blood.
"To save her life, I’ll say she is not so.","To save her life, I’ll say she doesn’t."
Her life is safest only in her birth.,Her life is only safe if she’s really of royal blood.
And only in that safety died her brothers.,"Yes, as safe as her brothers' lives were."
"Lo, at their births good stars were opposite.",They were born under unlucky stars.
"No, to their lives ill friends were contrary.",The stars weren’t the problem. Bad friends were.
All unavoided is the doom of destiny.,You can’t escape a bad destiny.
My babes were destined to a fairer death If grace had blessed thee with a fairer life.,"True, when a king who defies God is choosing that destiny. My children would have enjoyed a better death if God had blessed you with a purer life."
You speak as if that I had slain my cousins.,You speak as if I had killed my nephews.
"Cousins, indeed, and by their uncle cozened Whose hand soever launched their tender hearts, Thy head, all indirectly, gave direction. No doubt the murd'rous knife was dull and blunt Till it was whetted on thy stone-hard heart, But that still use of grief makes wild grief tame, My tongue should to thy ears not name my boys Till that my nails were anchored in thine eyes, And I, in such a desp'rate bay of death, Rush all to pieces on thy rocky bosom.","Nephews, indeed, cheated by their uncle of comfort, kingdom, relatives, freedom, and life. Whichever hand literally stabbed their tender hearts, you’re the one who gave the order. No doubt the murderous knife was blunt till it was sharpened on your stony heart—you reveled in my lambs' bloody guts. But constant expression of wild grief will only make it tame, so I’m not going to say any more about my boys until I’ve gouged your eyes out with my bare hands. Like a sailboat that has lost its sails, I will throw myself on your rocky bosom—and get torn to pieces."
"Madam, so thrive I in my enterprise And dangerous success of bloody wars As I intend more good to you and yours","Madam, if I do as well as I think I’m going to do in these dangerous, violent wars, you and your relatives will have more good at my hands than you’ve ever had bad!"
"What good is covered with the face of heaven, To be discovered, that can do me good?",What good does heaven have in store that can do me any good now?
"The advancement of your children, gentle lady.","The advancement of your children, noble lady."
"Up to some scaffold, there to lose their heads.","Advancement to some scaffold, to lose their heads."
The high imperial type of this earth’s glory.,"No, advancement to the dignity and height of honor, to a high, imperial kind of glory."
"Flatter my sorrow with report of it. Tell me what state, what dignity, what honor, Canst thou demise to any child of mine?",Flatter me in my mourning: tell me what dignity or honor you could possible bring to any child of mine?
Will I withal endow a child of thine; So in the Lethe of thy angry soul Thou drown the sad remembrance of those wrongs Which thou supposest I have done to thee.,"The dignity of everything I own. In fact, I will give a child of yours everything plus myself, provided you forget the wrongs you imagine I have done to you."
Last longer telling than thy kindness' date.,"Well, explain—but do it fast so that your puny store of kindness isn’t used up by talking about it."
Then know that from my soul I love thy daughter.,Then know that from my soul I love your daughter.
My daughter’s mother thinks it with her soul.,I believe it.
What do you think?,What do you believe?
"So from thy soul’s love didst thou love her brothers, And from my heart’s love I do thank thee for it.",That you love my daughter to spite your soul. That’s the way you loved my brothers. And that’s the way I thank you for it.
Be not so hasty to confound my meaning. I mean that with my soul I love thy daughter,Don’t be so quick to twist my meaning. I mean that I love your daughter with all my soul. I intend to make her queen of England.
"Well then, who dost thou mean shall be her king?","Tell me, who will be the king?"
Even he that makes her queen. Who else should be?,"The one who makes her queen, of course. Who else should it be?"
"What, thou?","What, you?"
Even so. How think you of it?,"Yes, exactly. Me. What do you think, madam?"
How canst thou woo her?,How would you woo her?
"That would I learn of you, As one being best acquainted with her humor.","That’s what I want to find out from you, who knows her best."
And wilt thou learn of me?,And will you learn from me?
"Madam, with all my heart.","Madam, with all my heart."
"Send to her, by the man that slew her brothers, “Edward” and “York.” Then haply she will weep. Therefore present to her—as sometime Margaret Did to thy father, steeped in Rutland’s blood— A handkerchief, which say to her did drain And bid her wipe her weeping eyes withal. If this inducement move her not to love, Send her a letter of thy noble deeds; Tell her thou mad’st away her uncle Clarence, Mad’st quick conveyance with her good aunt Anne.","Okay, then. Do this: send her a pair of bleeding hearts. Make clear they come from the man who killed her brothers. Write “Edward” and “York” on them. That will get her to weep. Then present her with a handkerchief, like the one Margaret gave your father, which was steeped in his son Rutland’s blood. Tell her this handkerchief sopped up the blood of her sweet brother’s body and urge her to dry her weeping eyes with it. If this encouragement doesn’t move her to love you, send her a description of your other noble deeds. Tell her how you secretly dispensed with her uncle Clarence, her uncle Rivers, and, for her sake, her good aunt Anne."
"You mock me, madam. This is not the way To win your daughter.","Come, come, you’re making fun of me. This is not the way to win your daughter."
"There is no other way, Unless thou couldst put on some other shape","There isn’t any other way, unless you took on another form and became someone else."
Say that I did all this for love of her.,But suppose I did all the things you named out of love for her.
"Nay, then indeed she cannot choose but hate thee, Having bought love with such a bloody spoil.","Then she has no choice but to hate you, as you purchased her love with murder."
"Look what is done cannot be now amended. Which after-hours give leisure to repent. If I did take the kingdom from your sons, To make amends I’ll give it to your daughter. If I have killed the issue of your womb, Mine issue of your blood upon your daughter. A grandam’s name is little less in love Than is the doting title of a mother. They are as children but one step below, Of all one pain, save for a night of groans Endured of her for whom you bid like sorrow. Your children were vexation to your youth, But mine shall be a comfort to your age. And by that loss your daughter is made queen. I cannot make you what amends I would; Therefore accept such kindness as I can. Dorset your son, that with a fearful soul This fair alliance quickly shall call home To high promotions and great dignity. The king that calls your beauteous daughter wife Familiarly shall call thy Dorset brother. And all the ruins of distressful times Repaired with double riches of content. What, we have many goodly days to see! The liquid drops of tears that you have shed Advantaging their love with interest Of ten times double gain of happiness. Go then, my mother; to thy daughter go.","Whatever has already been done can’t be undone now. Men act imprudently sometimes, then realize their mistakes when they have time to think about them. If I took the kingdom from your sons, I’ll give it to your daughter to make up for it. If I have killed your children, I will have children with your daughter. A grandmother is loved hardly less than a mother is. Your grandchildren will be just one step removed from your own children—they share your character, your blood, and require the same effort minus that one night of labor, like that which you suffered through for your own daughter. Your children caused you trouble in your youth, but mine will bring you comfort in your old age. The only loss you’ve had is that your son was not king. Because of that loss, your daughter will be queen. I can’t make up for everything that I’d like to, so accept such kindness as I can offer. Your son Dorset, who fled in fear to join an army in France against me, could come home to high promotions and great dignity. The king who calls your beautiful daughter “wife” will call Dorset “brother.” And you will be the mother to a king again, with all the miseries of unhappy times not just repaired, but also improved. Indeed, we have many good days to look forward to! The tears you have shed will be transformed into pearls. Your happiness will be like a loan that has grown through interest to ten times its original size. Go, then, mother, to your daughter."
"Make bold her bashful years with your experience; Put in her tender heart th' aspiring flame Of golden sovereignty; acquaint the Princess With the sweet silent hours of marriage joys; And when this arm of mine hath chastisèd Bound with triumphant garlands will I come And lead thy daughter to a conqueror’s bed, To whom I will retail my conquest won, And she shall be sole victoress, Caesar’s Caesar.","Give her the benefit of your experience, and prepare her to hear me court her. Make her aspire to be queen. Tell the princess about the sweet, silent hours of joy there are in marriage. And when my army has chastised the petty rebel, that stupid Buckingham, I will return wreathed in victory crowns and lead your daughter to a conqueror’s bed. She will be the only victor over my triumphs. She will be the ruler of a Caesar."
"Would be her lord? Or shall I say her uncle? Or he that slew her brothers and her uncles? Under what title shall I woo for thee, That God, the law, my honor and her love","What should I say to her? That her father’s brother wants to be her husband? Or should I say it’s her uncle? Or should I describe you as the one who killed her brothers and her uncles? How can I describe you that will make you appeal to the young woman and will also agree with God, the law, my honor, and her feelings?"
Infer fair England’s peace by this alliance.,Claim fair England’s peace depends on this alliance.
Which she shall purchase with still-lasting war.,She will purchase that peace with an everlasting war.
"Tell her the king, that may command, entreats—","Tell her that the king, who has the power to command people, asks her."
"That, at her hands, which the king’s King forbids.",He asks her to do what God forbids The Church forbid marriage between uncle and niece. forbids .
Say she shall be a high and mighty queen.,Say she will be a high and mighty queen.
"To vail the title, as her mother doth.","Only to watch that title become worthless, as her mother has."
Say I will love her everlastingly.,Say I will love her everlastingly.
But how long shall that title “ever” last?,But how long will “ever” last?
Sweetly in force unto her fair life’s end.,Until her beautiful life’s end.
But how long fairly shall her sweet life last?,But how long will her beautiful life last?
As long as heaven and nature lengthens it.,As long as heaven and nature extend it.
As long as hell and Richard likes of it.,As long as hell and Richard want it.
"Say I, her sovereign, am her subject low.","Tell her that I, her king, am her lowly subject."
"But she, your subject, loathes such sovereignty.","But she, your subject, hates such a king."
Be eloquent in my behalf to her.,Be eloquent on my behalf.
An honest tale speeds best being plainly told.,An honest tale succeeds best when it is told simply.
Then plainly to her tell my loving tale.,Then tell her my loving story in simple terms.
Plain and not honest is too harsh a style.,You can’t tell a story simply when it’s a lie.
Your reasons are too shallow and too quick.,Your answers are too shallow and too hasty.
"Too deep and dead, poor infants, in their graves.","Oh no, my reasons are deep and as permanent as death. They’re buried as deep as my poor infants in their grave."
"Harp not on that string, madam; that is past.","Don’t harp on that point, madam—it’s past."
Harp on it still shall I till heart-strings break.,I will harp on it till my heartstrings break.
"Now by my George, my Garter, and my crown—","Now, by St. George, my knighthood, and my crown—"
"Profaned, dishonored, and the third usurped.","The first you profaned, the second you dishonored, and the third you stole."
I swear—,I swear—
"By nothing, for this is no oath. Thy George, profaned, hath lost his lordly honor; Thy garter, blemished, pawned his knightly virtue; Thy crown, usurped, disgraced his kingly glory. Swear then by something that thou hast not wronged.","By nothing, because this is no oath. St. George loses his holiness once you have sworn by him; you’ve ruined the emblem of the knighthood, and the crown lost its kingly glory once you stole it. If you want me to believe something you’ll swear to, then swear by something you haven’t wronged."
"Then, by myself—","Then, by myself—"
Thyself is self-misused.,You’ve misused yourself.
"Now, by the world—","Now, by the world—"
'Tis full of thy foul wrongs.,It’s full of your ugly wrongdoings.
My father’s death—,By my father’s death—
Thy life hath it dishonored.,Your life has dishonored his death.
"Why then, by God.","Why then, by God—"
"God’s wrong is most of all. If thou didst fear to break an oath by Him, The unity the king my husband made Thou hadst not broken, nor my brothers died. If thou hadst feared to break an oath by Him, Had graced the tender temples of my child, And both the princes had been breathing here, Which now, two tender bedfellows for dust, Thy broken faith hath made the prey for worms.","You wrong God most of all. If you had been afraid to break an oath with him, you wouldn’t have ruined the united front the king, my husband, created before he died, and you wouldn’t have killed my brothers. If you had been afraid to break an oath with him, the crown you are currently wearing would have graced the head of my child, and both princes would still be alive, not preyed on by worms. What can you swear by now?"
The time to come.,By the future.
"That thou hast wrongèd in the time o'erpast; For I myself have many tears to wash Hereafter time, for time past wronged by thee. The children live whose fathers thou hast slaughtered, The parents live whose children thou hast butchered, Old barren plants, to wail it with their age. Swear not by time to come, for that thou hast Misused ere used, by times ill-used o'erpast.","You’ve already wronged that by what you did in the past. I myself have many tears to cry in the time to come, because of what you’ve done. There are children living whose fathers you have slaughtered. When they are grown, they will wail about a childhood in which no one watched out for them. There are parents living whose children you have butchered; they are now old withered plants who will moan over their losses as they grow old. Don’t swear by the future, because you’ve ruined it before it has even arrived."
"So thrive I in my dangerous affairs Of hostile arms! Myself myself confound, Heaven and fortune bar me happy hours, Day, yield me not thy light, nor night thy rest, To my proceedings if, with dear heart’s love, Immaculate devotion, holy thoughts, I tender not thy beauteous princely daughter. In her consists my happiness and thine. Herself, the land, and many a Christian soul, Death, desolation, ruin and decay. It cannot be avoided but by this; It will not be avoided but by this. Be the attorney of my love to her: Plead what I will be, not what I have been; Not my deserts, but what I will deserve. Urge the necessity and state of times,","May I only do well in these dangerous battles if my intention to repent and prosper is sincere! Let me destroy myself, let heaven and destiny deprive me of happy hours, let day remain dark and night sleepless, and let me have nothing but terrible luck if I do not love with a pure heart, clean devotion, and holy thoughts your beautiful royal daughter. My happiness and yours lie in her. If I do not win her, death, desolation, and decay will descend on this land and on me, you, herself, and many a Christian soul. Ruin cannot be avoided unless I marry her. It will not be avoided unless I marry her. Therefore, good mother—I must call you that—advocate for me. Plead with your daughter about what I will be, not what I have been. Don’t talk about my just desserts but about what I will deserve. Tell her how necessary this marriage is at this time, and don’t be small-minded about such important plans."
Shall I be tempted of the devil thus?,Shall I be tempted by the devil?
"Ay, if the devil tempt you to do good.","Yes, if the devil tempts you to do good."
Shall I forget myself to be myself?,Shall I forget the wrongs you’ve done to me so that I can be the mother of a king again?
"Ay, if your self’s remembrance wrong yourself.","Yes, if your memories do you no good."
Yet thou didst kill my children.,Yet you killed my children.
"But in your daughter’s womb I bury them, Where, in that nest of spicery, they will breed Selves of themselves, to your recomforture.","But in your daughter’s womb I will bury them. In that rich nest they shall grow again, to console you."
Shall I go win my daughter to thy will?,Should I go convince my daughter to marry you?
And be a happy mother by the deed.,And be a happy mother by doing so.
"I go. Write to me very shortly, And you shall understand from me her mind.",I’m going. Write to me very soon and I’ll let you know what she thinks.
"Bear her my true love’s kiss; and so, farewell.","Give her a kiss from me, her true love. And so, goodbye."
"Relenting fool and shallow, changing woman!","Weak-willed fool! Shallow, fickle woman!"
"How now, what news?",Hello! What’s the news?
"Most mighty sovereign, on the western coast Rideth a puissant navy. To our shores Throng many doubtful hollow-hearted friends, Unarmed and unresolved to beat them back. And there they hull, expecting but the aid Of Buckingham to welcome them ashore.","My noble king, a powerful fleet of ships sails on the western coast. Many former friends of ours have gathered to meet the fleet and aren’t willing to beat it back. Word is that Richmond is the navy’s admiral. The ships are drifting off the coast, sails unfurled, only waiting for Buckingham to help them come ashore."
"Some light-foot friend post to the duke of Norfolk— Ratcliffe, thyself, or Catesby. Where is he?","Someone who can ride fast, go to the duke of Norfolk Norfolk was a York loyalist–he stood behind Edward IV and Richard III, and he died fighting for Richard. Norfolk . You go, Ratcliffe, or Catesby. Where is Catesby?"
"Here, my good lord.","Here, my good lord."
"Catesby, fly to the duke.","Catesby, fly to the duke."
"I will, my lord, with all convenient haste.","I will my lord, as fast as I can."
"Ratcliffe, come hither. Post to Salisbury. When thou com’st thither Why stay’st thou here and go’st not to the duke?","Ratcliffe, come here. Ride to Salisbury. When you get there—(to CATESBY) Stupid, distracted rascal, why are you still standing there? Why haven’t you left for the duke’s?"
"First, mighty liege, tell me your Highness' pleasure, What from your Grace I shall deliver to him.","First, mighty king, tell me what you want me to tell him."
"O true, good Catesby. Bid him levy straight And meet me suddenly at Salisbury.","Oh, right, good Catesby. Tell him to gather together the greatest army he can muster in a hurry and meet me right away at Salisbury."
I go.,I’m off.
"What, may it please you, shall I do at Salisbury?",What would you like me to do at Salisbury?
"Why, what wouldst thou do there before I go?","Why, what is there to do before I get there?"
Your Highness told me I should post before.,Your Highness just told me that I should ride there before you.
My mind is changed.,I changed my mind.
"Stanley, what news with you?","Stanley, what news do you have?"
"None good, my liege, to please you with the hearing, Nor none so bad but well may be reported.","Nothing that you want to hear, my lord, but nothing so bad that I can’t mention it."
"Hoyday, a riddle! Neither good nor bad. When thou mayst tell thy tale the nearest way? Once more, what news?","Well, how nice, a riddle! Neither good nor bad. Why do you go around in circles when you could get to the point? Once again, what’s the news?"
Richmond is on the seas.,Richmond is sailing on the sea.
"There let him sink, and be the seas on him! White-livered runagate, what doth he there?","Let him sink there so the sea will cover him! Lily-livered coward, what’s he doing there?"
"I know not, mighty sovereign, but by guess.","I don’t know, mighty king. I can only guess."
"Well, as you guess?","Well, what do you guess?"
"Stirred up by Dorset, Buckingham, and Morton, He makes for England, here to claim the crown.","That, stirred up by Dorset, Buckingham, and Morton, he’s coming to England to claim the crown."
"Is the chair empty? Is the sword unswayed? What heir of York is there alive but we? And who is England’s king but great York’s heir? Then tell me, what makes he upon the seas?","Is the throne empty? Is the army without a leader? Is the king dead, the empire dispossessed? What heir of the York family is there alive other than myself? And who is England’s king but an heir of the great York? Therefore, tell me, what is he doing at sea?"
"Unless for that, my liege, I cannot guess.","Unless it’s what I said, your Majesty, I have no idea."
"You cannot guess wherefore the Welshman comes. Thou wilt revolt and fly to him, I fear.","Unless he’s coming to be your leader you can’t guess why the Welshman’s Richmond was a descendent of the Welshman Owen Tudor. Welshman’s coming? You plan to revolt and join him, I’m afraid."
"No, my good lord. Therefore mistrust me not.","No, mighty king, do not distrust me."
"Where is thy power, then, to beat him back? Are they not now upon the western shore, Safe-conducting the rebels from their ships?","Where is your army, then, to beat him back? Where are your tenants and your followers? Aren’t they at this very moment on the western shore helping the rebels land safely from their ships?"
"No, my good lord. My friends are in the north.","No, my good lord, my friends are in the north."
Cold friends to me. What do they in the north,Then they’re cold friends to me. What are they doing in the north when they should be in the west serving their king?
"They have not been commanded, mighty king. Pleaseth your Majesty to give me leave, I’ll muster up my friends and meet your Grace Where and what time your Majesty shall please.","They haven’t been commanded to go to the west, mighty king. If your Majesty would like, I’ll muster up my friends and meet you wherever and whenever you like."
But I’ll not trust thee.,"Yes, you want to go join Richmond. But I’m not going to trust you."
"Most mighty sovereign, You have no cause to hold my friendship doubtful. I never was nor never will be false.","Most mighty sovereign, you have no reason to doubt my friendship. I was never disloyal, and I never will be."
"Go then and muster men, but leave behind Or else his head’s assurance is but frail.","Then go gather your men, but leave behind your son, George Stanley. Make sure your faith is firm, or he has little chance of keeping his head."
So deal with him as I prove true to you.,Treat him as my loyalty toward you calls for.
"My gracious sovereign, now in Devonshire, As I by friends am well advertisèd, Bishop of Exeter, his elder brother, With many more confederates are in arms.","My noble king, my friends have informed me that Sir Edward Courtney and his brother, the haughty Bishop of Exeter, are now in Devonshire Devonshire: a county in southwest England Devonshire , where they have assembled an army."
"In Kent, my liege, the Guilfords are in arms, And every hour more competitors","My king, the Guildfords in Kent Kent: a count ysoutheast of London Kent have armed themselves, and every hour new associates flock to their aid, and their army increases."
"My lord, the army of great Buckingham—","My lord, the duke of Buckingham’s army—"
"Out on you, owls! Nothing but songs of death. He striketh him There, take thou that till thou bring better news.","Enough, you owls The cry of the owl was thought to be a death omen. owls ! Do you have nothing but songs of death? (he strikes the THIRD MESSENGER) Take that until you bring me better news."
"Is that by sudden floods and fall of waters Buckingham’s army is dispersed and scattered, And he himself wandered away alone, No man knows whither.",The news I have to tell your majesty is that Buckingham’s army has dispersed from sudden floods and heavy rainfall. Buckingham himself has wandered away alone to who knows where.
I cry thee mercy. He gives money Hath any well-advisèd friend proclaimed Reward to him that brings the traitor in?,I beg your pardon. Here’s some money to make up for that blow I gave you. (he gives money) Has any intelligent friend of ours offered a reward to whoever catches the traitor?
"Such proclamation hath been made, my lord.","Yes, your Highness."
"'Tis said, my liege, in Yorkshire are in arms. But this good comfort bring I to your Highness: The Breton navy is dispersed by tempest. Richmond, in Dorsetshire, sent out a boat If they were his assistants, yea or no— Who answered him they came from Buckingham Upon his party. He, mistrusting them, Hoisted sail and made his course for Brittany.","It’s been reported that Sir Thomas Lovell and Lord Marquess Dorset have assembled an army in Yorkshire Yorkshire: a town in northern England Yorkshire , my lord. But I bring your Grace this comfort: a storm has dispersed the navy from Brittany. And Richmond, who is in Dorsetshir Dorsetshire: a county on England’s south coast Dorsetshir e, sent a boat to shore to ask the men on the banks if they were on his side, yes or no. They said they were with Buckingham. Richmond didn’t trust them. He hoisted sail again and sailed back to Brittany."
"If not to fight with foreign enemies, Yet to beat down these rebels here at home.","Let’s keep marching since we’re prepared to fight. Even if we don’t fight foreign enemies, we’ll beat down these rebels at home."
"My liege, the duke of Buckingham is taken. That is the best news. That the earl of Richmond Is colder tidings, yet they must be told.","Your Majesty, the duke of Buckingham has been captured—that’s the best news. The fact that the earl of Richmond has landed in Milford Milford Haven is on the coast of Wales. Milford with a mighty army is less good news, but it must be told."
"Away towards Salisbury! While we reason here, A royal battle might be won and lost. Someone take order Buckingham be brought","Away toward Salisbury! While we’re talking here, a royal battle could be won and lost. Someone deliver the order that Buckingham be brought to Salisbury. Everyone else, march on with me."
"Sir Christopher, tell Richmond this from me: That in the sty of the most deadly boar My son George Stanley is franked up in hold; If I revolt, off goes young George’s head; So get three gone. Commend me to thy lord. Withal, say that the queen hath heartily consented He should espouse Elizabeth her daughter. But, tell me, where is princely Richmond now?","Sir Christopher, relay this message to Richmond: My son George Stanley is penned up in the bloody boar’s sty. If I revolt, off goes young George’s head. My fear of that prevents me from helping Richmond at this time. But, tell me, where is the noble Richmond now?"
"At Pembroke, or at Ha'rfordwest in Wales.","At Pembroke, or at Harfordwest in Wales."
What men of name resort to him?,Which noblemen have joined him?
"Sir Walter Herbert, a renownèd soldier; Sir Gilbert Talbot, Sir William Stanley, Oxford, redoubted Pembroke, Sir James Blunt, And many other of great name and worth; And towards London they do bend their power, If by the way they be not fought withal.","Sir Walter Herbert, a renowned soldier; Sir Gilbert Talbot; Sir William Stanley; Oxford; the highly feared Pembroke; Sir James Blunt; Rice ap Thomas, with a valiant crew; and many other famous and powerful noblemen. They plan to head straight to London, assuming they don’t encounter any resistance on the way."
"(gives him a paper) Well, hie thee to thy lord. Farewell.","(giving him a paper) Return to your lord. Give him my best regards. Tell him the queen has given her heartfelt consent to his marriage to her daughter, Elizabeth. And these letters will let him know what my thinking is. Goodbye, and take care."
Will not King Richard let me speak with him?,Won’t King Richard let me speak with him?
"No, my good lord. Therefore be patient.","No, my good lord. So be calm."
"Hastings and Edward’s children, Grey and Rivers, Holy King Henry and thy fair son Edward, By underhand, corrupted, foul injustice, If that your moody, discontented souls Do through the clouds behold this present hour, Even for revenge mock my destruction.—","Hastings and Edward’s children, Rivers and Grey, holy King Henry and your fine son Edward, Vaughan, and all who have died from underhanded, corrupt, fiendish injustice, if your angry souls are witnessing this moment through the clouds, enjoy the revenge—laugh at my ruin! This is All-Souls’ A Catholic day of prayer for souls stuck in between Heaven and Hell All-Souls’ day, fellows, isn’t it?"
It is.,"It is, my lord."
"Why, then All Souls' Day is my body’s doomsday. This is the day which, in King Edward’s time, I wished might fall on me when I was found This is the day wherein I wished to fall By the false faith of him who most I trusted. This, this All Souls' Day to my fearful soul Is the determined respite of my wrongs. Hath turned my feignèd prayer on my head And given in earnest what I begged in jest.","Why, then, it’s my body’s doomsday. Today I’m going to get what I said I wished would happen to me if I was ever false to King Edward’s children or his wife’s allies. This is the day I’m going to get what I wished for when I wished that the person I most trusted would betray me. This, this All-Souls' day, is my just desserts. I tried to play games with God, and he turned my fake prayer on my head, giving me for real what I’d asked for as a joke."
"Thus doth he force the swords of wicked men To turn their own points in their masters' bosoms. “When he,” quoth she, “shall split thy heart with sorrow, Remember Margaret was a prophetess.”— Come, lead me, officers, to the block of shame. Wrong hath but wrong, and blame the due of blame.","This is how God forces wicked men to turn their swords against themselves. Margaret’s curse has come true. “When Richard has split your heart in two with grief,” she said, “you’ll know that Margaret was a prophetess.” Come, sirs, bring me to this block of shame. I have done wrong, so I will suffer wrong. I have been blamed because I deserved to be."
"Fellows in arms, and my most loving friends, Bruised underneath the yoke of tyranny, Have we marched on without impediment, Thus far into the bowels of the land Lines of fair comfort and encouragement. The wretched, bloody, and usurping boar, That spoiled your summer fields and fruitful vines, Swills your warm blood like wash, and makes his trough Is now even in the center of this isle, Near to the town of Leicester, as we learn. From Tamworth thither is but one day’s march. In God’s name, cheerly on, courageous friends, By this one bloody trial of sharp war.","Fellow soldiers and my loyal friends suffering under that tyrant Richard, we have marched all the way to the center of England without encountering any opposition. And now we receive encouraging news from my stepfather Stanley: Richard—that violent, greedy boar who roots through your summer fields and ripening vines, guzzles your warm blood, and makes his trough in your disemboweled bellies—is now near the town of Leicester, only one day’s march from us here in Tamworth Tamworth is in central England. Tamworth . In God’s name, let’s continue on in high spirits, my courageous friends. Our aim is to achieve everlasting peace from this one violent war."
"Every man’s conscience is a thousand men, To fight against this guilty homicide.",Every man’s conscience is a thousand swords against this murderer.
I doubt not but his friends will turn to us.,I suspect his friends will join us.
Which in his dearest need will fly from him.,"He has no friends except those who are too afraid to defy him. In his greatest need, even they will desert him."
"All for our vantage. Then, in God’s name, march. True hope is swift, and flies with swallow’s wings. Kings it makes gods, and meaner creatures kings.","All to our advantage. So, in God’s name, let’s march. Hope with good cause is swift; it flies as fast as a swallow. It turns kings into gods and men of lower rank into kings."
"Here pitch our tent, even here in Bosworth field.— My Lord of Surrey, why look you so sad?","Let’s pitch our tents right here in Bosworth Field. My Lord of Surrey, why do you look so sad?"
My heart is ten times lighter than my looks.,My heart is ten times lighter than my looks.
My Lord of Norfolk—,My Lord of Norfolk—
"Here, most gracious liege.","Here, most gracious king."
"Norfolk, we must have knocks, ha, must we not?","Norfolk, we’re going to have a few blows, right?"
"We must both give and take, my loving lord.","We’ve got to give them and take them, my lord."
"Up with my tent!—Here will I lie tonight. But where tomorrow? Well, all’s one for that.","Put my tent up! I’ll lie here tonight. But where will I lie tomorrow? Well, it doesn’t matter. Does anyone know the number of the enemy’s troops?"
Six or seven thousand is their utmost power.,"Six or seven thousand, at most."
"Why, our battalia trebles that account. Besides, the king’s name is a tower of strength Which they upon the adverse party want. Let us survey the vantage of the ground. Call for some men of sound direction. Let’s lack no discipline, make no delay, For, lords, tomorrow is a busy day.","Why, our troops amount to three times that. Besides, the king’s name is a tower of strength; the opposition doesn’t have that advantage. Put up my tent! Come, noble gentlemen, let us look at our battle plan and get some experienced officers to help us figure out the best strategy. Let’s be disciplined and not delay, because tomorrow is a busy day."
"And by the bright track of his fiery car, Gives token of a goodly day tomorrow.— Sir William Brandon, you shall bear my standard.— Give me some ink and paper in my tent; Limit each leader to his several charge, And part in just proportion our small power. My Lord of Oxford, you, Sir William Brandon, And you, Sir Walter Herbert, stay with me. Good Captain Blunt, bear my goodnight to him, And by the second hour in the morning Desire the earl to see me in my tent. Yet one thing more, good captain, do for me.","The sunset was golden and left a bright track in the sky, which indicates that tomorrow will be a good day. Sir William Brandon, you will carry my flag. Bring some ink and paper to my tent, and I’ll draw a model of our battle, appoint each leader to his particular command, and carefully divide up our small army. My Lord of Oxford, you, Sir William Brandon, and you, Sir Walter Herbert, are going to stay with me. The earl of Pembroke will stick with his regiment. Good Captain Blunt, tell the earl goodnight from me, and tell him that by two in the morning I would like him to visit my tent. One more thing before you go, Blunt—where is Lord Stanley lodging, do you know?"
"Unless I have mista'en his colors much, Which well I am assured I have not done, His regiment lies half a mile, at least, South from the mighty power of the king.","Unless I’ve mistaken his battle flags, which I’m sure I haven’t, his regiment lies at least half a mile south of the king’s mighty army."
"Sweet Blunt, make some good means to speak with him, And give him from me this most needful note.","If it’s possible to do this without putting yourself in danger, dear Captain Blunt, say goodnight to him from me and give him this important note."
"Upon my life, my lord, I’ll undertake it. And so God give you quiet rest tonight!","Upon my life, my lord, I’ll do it. Have a restful night!"
"Good night, good Captain Blunt.","Good night, dear Captain Blunt."
"Come, gentlemen, Let us consult upon tomorrow’s business Into my tent. The dew is raw and cold.","Come, gentlemen, let’s discuss tomorrow’s action in my tent. The night air is too raw and cold for us to stay outdoors."
What is “t o”clock?,What time is it?
"It’s suppertime, my lord. It’s nine o'clock.","It’s dinnertime, my lord. It’s nine o'clock."
"I will not sup tonight. Give me some ink and paper. What, is my beaver easier than it was? And all my armor laid into my tent?",I’m not going to eat dinner tonight. Give me some ink and paper. Is the visor of my helmet working better now? And has my armor been put in my tent?
"It is, my liege, and all things are in readiness.","Yes, my lord. Everything’s ready."
Use careful watch. Choose trusty sentinels.,"My good man Norfolk, hurry to your post. Be careful whom you choose as guards—make sure they’re trustworthy."
"I go, my lord.","I’m off, my lord."
"Stir with the lark tomorrow, gentle Norfolk.",Get up early tomorrow—at the sound of the lark—noble Norfolk.
"I warrant you, my lord.","I will, my lord."
Catesby.,Catesby.
My lord.,"Yes, my lord?"
"Send out a pursuivant-at-arms To Stanley’s regiment. Bid him bring his power Before sunrising, lest his son George fall",Send a junior officer to Stanley’s regiment to tell Stanley to bring his men here before sunrise—if he wants to see his son George alive.
"(to soldiers) Fill me a bowl of wine. Give me a watch. Saddle white Surrey for the field to-morrow. Look that my staves be sound, and not too heavy.— Ratcliffe.","(to soldiers) Get me some wine. Get a soldier to stand watch outside my tent. Saddle my white horse Surrey for battle tomorrow. Make sure the shafts of my lances are solid, but not too heavy. Ratcliffe!"
My lord.,"Yes, my lord?"
Sawst thou the melancholy Lord Northumberland?,Did you see the gloomy Lord Northumberland?
"Thomas the earl of Surrey and himself, Much about cockshut time, from troop to troop Went through the army cheering up the soldiers.","Thomas, the earl of Surrey, and he were moving from troop to troop around twilight cheering up the soldiers."
I have not that alacrity of spirit Nor cheer of mind that I was wont to have. Set it down. Is ink and paper ready?,"Good, I’m satisfied. Give me some wine—I don’t feel as energetic as I used to. Set it down. Is my ink and paper ready?"
"It is, my lord.","It is, my lord."
"Ratcliffe, about the mid of night come to my tent And help to arm me. Leave me, I say.","Make sure my guard is on duty and leave me alone. Ratcliffe, around midnight come to my tent and help me put on my armor. Now leave me alone, as I said."
Fortune and victory sit on thy helm!,Let fortune and victory be yours!
"All comfort that the dark night can afford Tell me, how fares our loving mother?","I wish you all the comfort that such a dark night as this can offer, noble father-in-law. Tell me, how is my mother?"
"I, by attorney, bless thee from thy mother, Who prays continually for Richmond’s good. So much for that. The silent hours steal on, In brief, for so the season bids us be, Prepare thy battle early in the morning, And put thy fortune to the arbitrament Of bloody strokes and mortal-staring war. With best advantage will deceive the time, And aid thee in this doubtful shock of arms. But on thy side I may not be too forward, Lest, being seen, thy brother, tender George, Farewell. The leisure and the fearful time Cuts off the ceremonious vows of love And ample interchange of sweet discourse, Which so-long-sundered friends should dwell upon. Once more, adieu. Be valiant, and speed well.","Your mother sends her blessings. She prays continually on your behalf. Enough about that—morning will be here soon. To be brief—as the occasion requires—prepare to fight early in the morning, when your future will be decided. I can’t do everything I want to, but I’ll help you as well as I can. But I can’t be too obvious about being on your side without risking the life of your stepbrother, young George. If I’m seen helping you, George will be killed right in front of my eyes. Farewell. The lack of time and the risk I’m under will have to keep us from bonding and catching up on each other’s news the way we usually would after not seeing each other for so long. I hope we have the time some day! Again, goodbye. Be brave and do well!"
"Good lords, conduct him to his regiment: I’ll strive with troubled thoughts to take a nap, Lest leaden slumber peise me down tomorrow, Once more, good night, kind lords and gentlemen.","Good lords, escort him to his regiment. I’m going to try to take a nap despite my racing thoughts so that exhaustion won’t get the better of me tomorrow, when I’ll need to ride as if my horse had wings. Again, good night, kind lords and gentlemen."
"O Thou, whose captain I account myself, Look on my forces with a gracious eye. Put in their hands thy bruising irons of wrath, The usurping helmets of our adversaries! Make us thy ministers of chastisement, That we may praise thee in the victory! To thee I do commend my watchful soul, Sleeping and waking, O, defend me still! Sleeps","Oh God, whose side I think I’m fighting on, look kindly on my forces. Fuel them with dangerous fury, so they can crush the enemy. Make us your agents of revenge, so we can praise you when we’re victorious! Before I fall asleep, I entrust my soul to you. Defend me, God, both when I’m asleep and when I’m awake. He sleeps."
"(to RICHARD) Let me sit heavy on thy soul tomorrow! Think how thou stabbed’st me in my prime of youth (to RICHMOND) Be cheerful, Richmond, for the wrongèd souls Of butchered princes fight in thy behalf. King Henry’s issue, Richmond, comforts thee.","(to RICHARD) I will weigh heavily on your soul tomorrow. Remember how you stabbed me at Tewksbury, when I was just a young man. Despair, and die! (to RICHMOND) Be cheerful, Richmond—butchered princes fight for you. I, King Henry’s son, will provide you with comfort."
"By thee was punchèd full of deadly holes. Think on the Tower and me. Despair, and die! Harry the Sixth bids thee despair and die. (to RICHMOND) Harry, that prophesied thou shouldst be king, Doth comfort thee in thy sleep. Live and flourish.","(to RICHARD) When I was still alive, you punctured my body, the body of God’s blessed king, full of holes. Remember the Tower and me there. Despair, and die! Harry the Sixth commands you to despair and die! (to RICHMOND) Because you are virtuous and holy, you must be the conqueror! Harry, who prophesied that you would be king, comforts you in your sleep: live and prosper!"
"(to RICHARD) Let me sit heavy in thy soul tomorrow, I, that was washed to death with fulsome wine, Tomorrow in the battle think on me, And fall thy edgeless sword. Despair, and die! (to RICHMOND) Thou offspring of the house of Lancaster, The wrongèd heirs of York do pray for thee","(to RICHARD) I hope I weigh heavily on your soul tomorrow! It’s me, drowned to death in a nauseating barrel of wine. It’s me, poor Clarence, whom you betrayed to death! Tomorrow in battle, think of me and drop your useless sword. Despair, and die! (to RICHMOND) Offspring of the House of Lancaster, the wronged heirs of York pray for you. Good angels protect your fight! Live and prosper!"
"(to RICHARD) Let me sit heavy in thy soul tomorrow, Rivers, that died at Pomfret. Despair, and die!","(to RICHARD) I will weigh heavily on your soul tomorrow—I, Rivers, who died at Pomfret. Despair, and die!"
"(to RICHARD) Think upon Grey, and let thy soul despair!","(to RICHARD) Think about Grey, and despair!"
"(to RICHARD) Let fall thy lance. Despair, and die!","(to RICHARD) Think about Vaughan, and drop your lance from fear and guilt. Despair, and die!"
"(to RICHMOND) Awake, and think our wrongs in Richard’s bosom Will conquer him! Awake, and win the day.","(to RICHMOND) Awaken, and have faith that the wrongs Richard carries in his heart will defeat him! Awaken, and win the day!"
"Dream on thy cousins smothered in the Tower. Let us be lead within thy bosom, Richard, And weigh thee down to ruin, shame, and death. Thy nephews' souls bid thee despair and die. Sleep, Richmond, sleep in peace and wake in joy. Good angels guard thee from the boar’s annoy. Live, and beget a happy race of kings. Edward’s unhappy sons do bid thee flourish.","(to RICHARD) Dream about your nephews, smothered in the Tower. Let us rest in your heart as heavily as lead, Richard, and drag you down to ruin, shame, and death! Your nephews' souls command that you despair and die! (to RICHMOND) Sleep, Richmond, sleep in peace and wake in joy. Good angels will protect you from the boar’s attacks! Live, and give birth to a whole, happy race of kings! Edward’s unlucky sons want you to flourish."
"And in a bloody battle end thy days. Think on Lord Hastings. Despair and die! (to RICHMOND) Quiet, untroubled soul, awake, awake. Arm, fight, and conquer for fair England’s sake.","(to RICHARD) You violent, guilty man, wake up full of guilt and end your days in a bloody battle! Think about Lord Hastings. Despair, and die! (to RICHMOND) Quiet untroubled soul, wake up! Arm yourself, fight, and win for beautiful England’s sake!"
"Richard, thy wife, that wretched Anne thy wife, That never slept a quiet hour with thee, Now fills thy sleep with perturbations. Tomorrow, in the battle, think on me, (to RICHMOND) Thou quiet soul, sleep thou a quiet sleep. Dream of success and happy victory. Thy adversary’s wife doth pray for thee.","(to RICHARD) Richard, your wife, your wretched wife, Anne, who never enjoyed a quiet hour of sleep with you, now fills your sleep with disturbing thoughts. Tomorrow in battle think of me and fall on your sword: despair, and die! (to RICHMOND) You quiet soul, sleep a quiet sleep. Dream of success and happy victory. Your enemy’s wife is praying for you."
"(to RICHARD) The last was I that helped thee to the crown; O, in the battle think on Buckingham, And die in terror of thy guiltiness. Dream on, dream on, of bloody deeds and death. Fainting, despair; despairing, yield thy breath. But cheer thy heart, and be thou not dismayed. God and good angels fight on Richmond’s side, And Richard fall in height of all his pride.","(to RICHARD) I was the first to help you to the crown and the last to feel the effects of your tyranny. Think of Buckingham when you’re fighting tomorrow, and die terrified of the sins you’ve committed! Tonight, dream of bloody deeds and death. Tomorrow, when you lose heart, fall into despair and then death. (to RICHMOND) I died before I could help you as I was hoping to. But be cheerful and don’t worry. God and good angels fight on your side, and Richard will fall at the height of his false pride."
"Give me another horse! Bind up my wounds! O coward conscience, how dost thou afflict me! The lights burn blue. It is now dead midnight. Cold fearful drops stand on my trembling flesh. What do I fear? Myself? There’s none else by. Is there a murderer here? No. Yes, I am. Then fly! What, from myself? Great reason why: Lest I revenge. What, myself upon myself? Alack, I love myself. Wherefore? For any good O, no! Alas, I rather hate myself For hateful deeds committed by myself. I am a villain. Yet I lie. I am not. Fool, of thyself speak well. Fool, do not flatter.","Give me another horse! Bandage my wounds! Have mercy, Jesus!—Wait, I was only dreaming. Oh cowardly conscience, how you’re torturing me! The candles burn blue—that means it’s the dead of night. I’m sweating and trembling with fear. But what am I afraid of? Myself? There’s no one else here. Richard loves Richard, that is, there’s just me and myself here. Is there a murderer here? No. Yes, I am. Then run away. What, from myself? Yes, to avoid taking revenge on myself. Unfortunately, I love myself. Why? Did I do anything good to myself? Oh, no. Alas, I hate myself instead, because of the hateful deeds I’ve committed. I am a villain. But I’m lying; I’m not a villain. Fool, speak well of yourself. Fool, do not flatter yourself."
"And every tongue brings in a several tale, And every tale condemns me for a villain. Perjury, perjury, in the highest degree; Murder, stern murder, in the direst degree; Throng to the bar, crying all, “Guilty! guilty!” I shall despair. There is no creature loves me, And if I die no soul will pity me. And wherefore should they, since that I myself Methought the souls of all that I had murdered Came to my tent, and every one did threat Tomorrow’s vengeance on the head of Richard.","Give me another horse! Bandage my wounds! Have mercy, Jesus!—Wait, I was only dreaming. Oh cowardly conscience, how you’re torturing me! The candles burn blue—that means it’s the dead of night. I’m sweating and trembling with fear. But what am I afraid of? Myself? There’s no one else here. Richard loves Richard, that is, there’s just me and myself here. Is there a murderer here? No. Yes, I am. Then run away. What, from myself? Yes, to avoid taking revenge on myself. Unfortunately, I love myself. Why? Did I do anything good to myself? Oh, no. Alas, I hate myself instead, because of the hateful deeds I’ve committed. I am a villain. But I’m lying; I’m not a villain. Fool, speak well of yourself. Fool, do not flatter yourself."
My lord.,My lord.
"Zounds, who is there?","Damn it, who’s there?"
"Ratcliffe, my lord, ’tis I. The early village cock Hath twice done salutation to the morn. Your friends are up and buckle on their armor.","Ratcliffe, my lord, it’s me. The rooster has already crowed twice. Your friends are up and buckling on their armor."
"O Ratcliffe, I have dreamed a fearful dream!","Oh Ratcliffe, I had a terrifying dream! What do you think, will my friends prove loyal?"
"No doubt, my lord.","No doubt, my lord."
"O Ratcliffe, I fear, I fear.","Oh Ratcliffe, I’m afraid, I’m afraid—"
"Nay, good my lord, be not afraid of shadows.","No, my good lord, don’t be afraid of dreams."
"By the apostle Paul, shadows tonight Than can the substance of ten thousand soldiers Armed in proof and led by shallow Richmond. 'Tis not yet near day. Come, go with me; Under our tents I’ll play the eavesdropper","By St. Paul, ghosts have struck more terror in my soul tonight than ten thousand of worthless Richmond’s soldiers could, dressed up in their most sword-proof armor. It’s not yet daylight. Come with me; I’ll spy under the tents to see if any of my own people plan to desert me."
"Good morrow, Richmond.","Good morning, Richmond."
"Cry mercy, lords and watchful gentlemen, That you have ta'en a tardy sluggard here.","Pardon me, lords and gentlemen who stayed awake. You’ve caught me oversleeping."
"How have you slept, my lord?","How did you sleep, my lord?"
"That ever entered in a drowsy head Have I since your departure had, my lords. Methought their souls whose bodies Richard murdered Came to my tent and cried on victory. In the remembrance of so fair a dream. How far into the morning is it, lords?","Since you left, I’ve been enjoying the sweetest sleep and most promising dreams I’ve ever had, my lords. I dreamed the souls of the people Richard murdered came to my tent and promised me victory. I tell you, I feel very jolly remembering such a beautiful dream. How late is it, lords?"
Upon the stroke of four.,It’s almost four.
"Why, then ’tis time to arm and give direction. More than I have said, loving countrymen, The leisure and enforcement of the time Forbids to dwell upon. Yet remember this:","Why, then, it’s time to put on my armor and instruct the troops. (to his soldiers) I can’t tell you much right now, loyal countrymen, because we don’t have time. But know this:"
"God and our good cause fight upon our side. Like high-reared bulwarks, stand before our faces. Richard except, those whom we fight against Had rather have us win than him they follow. For what is he they follow? Truly, gentlemen, One raised in blood, and one in blood established; One that made means to come by what he hath, And slaughtered those that were the means to help him; A base foul stone, made precious by the foil One that hath ever been God’s enemy. Then if you fight against God’s enemy, God will, in justice, ward you as his soldiers. If you do sweat to put a tyrant down, If you do fight against your country’s foes, Your country’s fat shall pay your pains the hire. If you do fight in safeguard of your wives, Your wives shall welcome home the conquerors. Your children’s children quits it in your age. Then, in the name of God and all these rights, Advance your standards. Draw your willing swords. For me, the ransom of my bold attempt But if I thrive, the gain of my attempt The least of you shall share his part thereof. Sound drums and trumpets boldly and cheerfully; God and Saint George! Richmond and victory!","We have God and a good cause on our side. The prayers of saints and those that Richard wronged support us like high-walled fortresses. Other than Richard, even those whom we fight against would rather we won. Because who is this man they follow? Truly, gentlemen, a violent tyrant and a murderer, who rose to his high position by shedding blood and kept the position the same way. He rose to the top by means of others and then slaughtered them. He’s like a worthless stone, who only seems like a valuable gem because he’s on the throne, where he doesn’t belong. He has always been God’s enemy. And when you fight God’s enemy, God will protect you. If you struggle to bring down a tyrant, you will sleep peacefully when the tyrant is killed. When you fight against your country’s enemies, you will be paid for your efforts with your country’s wealth. If you fight to protect your wives, your wives will welcome you home as conquerors. When you free your children from the sword, your grandchildren will repay you in your old age. So, in the name of God and all the good that will come of this battle In the Middle Ages, noblemen taken in battle often could go free afterward if they paid the enemy. Richmond says if Richard captures him, he will die rather than pay for his freedom. battle , march with your flags high and draw your swords. As for me, if I fail, the only ransom I will offer the enemy is my corpse. But if I succeed, every one of you will share in the profit. Play boldly and cheerfully, drummers and trumpeters. Here’s to God and Saint George! To Richmond and victory!"
What said Northumberland as touching Richmond?,What did Northumberland say about Richmond?
That he was never trainèd up in arms.,That he was never trained as a soldier.
He said the truth. And what said Surrey then?,That’s true. And what did Surrey say to that?
He smiled and said “The better for our purpose.”,"He smiled and said, “The better for us.”"
"He was in the right, and so indeed it is.","He’s right, and that’s how it is."
He looks in an almanac Who saw the sun today?,Read the time there. Give me an almanac. (looking in an almanac) Did anyone see the sun today?
"Not I, my lord.","I didn’t, my lord."
"Then he disdains to shine, for by the book A black day will it be to somebody. Ratcliffe!","Then it refuses to shine. According to this almanac, it should have risen an hour ago. It’ll be a black day for somebody today. Ratcliffe!"
My lord.,My lord?
"The sun will not be seen today. The sky doth frown and lour upon our army. Not shine today? Why, what is that to me More than to Richmond, for the selfsame heaven That frowns on me looks sadly upon him.","The sun will not appear today. The sky frowns and scowls on our army. I wish there wasn’t so much dew on the ground. So, the sun won’t shine today! Well, why should that be worse for me than it is for Richmond? The same heaven that’s frowning on me looks gloomily on him."
"Arm, arm, my lord. The foe vaunts in the field.","Get ready, my lord. The enemy is making its appearance on the battlefield."
"Call up Lord Stanley; bid him bring his power.— I will lead forth my soldiers to the plain, And thus my battle shall be orderèd: My foreward shall be drawn out all in length, Our archers shall be placèd in the midst. John Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Earl of Surrey, Shall have the leading of this foot and horse. They thus directed, we will follow Shall be well wingèd with our chiefest horse. This, and Saint George to boot—What think’st thou, Norfolk?","Hurry, hurry—prepare my horse. Tell Lord Stanley to bring his army. I will lead my soldiers to the field and the battle formation will be like this: the vanguard will extend in a line that is equal parts horsemen and foot soldiers. The archers will stay in the middle. John Duke of Norfolk and Thomas Earl of Surrey will lead the horsemen and foot soldiers. I’ll follow in the center of the troop formation, which I’ll defend with my best horse, and with Saint George on my side, as well! What do you think, Norfolk?"
"A good direction, warlike sovereign.","A good plan, warrior king. I found this pinned to my tent this morning."
"This found I on my tent this morning.","I found this pinned to my tent this morning."
"(reads) Jockey of Norfolk, be not so bold. For Dickon thy master is bought and sold. A thing devisèd by the enemy.— Let not our babbling dreams affright our souls. Conscience is but a word that cowards use, Devised at first to keep the strong in awe. Our strong arms be our conscience, swords our law.","(reads) “Jackie of Norfolk, don’t be too bold, for Dick your master has been betrayed.” Something the enemy devised. Go, gentleman, every man to his command. Don’t let babbling dreams frighten us—conscience is just a word that cowards use to intimidate the strong. The strong fight we put on will be our conscience, our swords will be our law."
"If not to heaven, then hand in hand to hell. His oration to his army What shall I say more than I have inferred? Remember whom you are to cope withal, A scum of Bretons and base lackey peasants, Whom their o'er-cloyèd country vomits forth To desperate ventures and assured destruction. You sleeping safe, they bring to you unrest; They would restrain the one, distain the other. And who doth lead them but a paltry fellow, Long kept in Brittany at our mother’s cost, A milksop, one that never in his life Let’s whip these stragglers o'er the seas again, Lash hence these overweening rags of France, These famished beggars weary of their lives, Who, but for dreaming on this fond exploit, If we be conquered, let men conquer us, And not these bastard Bretons, whom our fathers Have in their own land beaten, bobbed, and thumped, And in record, left them the heirs of shame. Ravish our daughters?","March on, be brave in battle, and let’s go pell-mell to heaven, if not hand in hand to hell. (to his army) What more can I say? Remember who you’re dealing with—a random bunch of bums, rascals, runaways, Breton scum, and peasant hangers-on whom an overcrowded nation vomits out to populate every desperate, sure-to-fail enterprise. You have been sleeping soundly, and they bring unrest. You own land they want to steal. Those of you who are blessed with beautiful wives, they want to defile them. And who’s leading them but an inconsequential fellow who for the longest time lived in Brittany at his mother’s expense? A girly man, a man who never in his life felt more cold than seeps into one’s boots in the snow? Let’s send these stragglers back over the sea. Let’s whip these arrogant relics of France—these starving beggars, tired of their lives, who would have hanged themselves, poor rats, if it weren’t for this foolish enterprise they’ve been dreaming about—back to France. If we’re going to be conquered, let men conquer us, and not these French bastards whom our forefathers already beat, thrashed, and pummeled on their own turf, and shamed them forever in the history books. Should these people enjoy our lands? Sleep with our wives? Rape our daughters?"
"Hark! I hear their drum. Fight, gentlemen of England.—Fight, bold yeomen.— Draw, archers, draw your arrows to the head.— Amaze the welkin with your broken staves—","Listen! I hear their drums. Fight, gentlemen of England! Fight, brave landlords! Draw your bows all the way back, archers! Spur your proud horses hard, horsemen, and ride in blood. Startle even the sky with the sound of your lances cracking."
What says Lord Stanley? Will he bring his power?,What does Lord Stanley say? Will he bring his army?
"My lord, he doth deny to come.","My lord, he refuses to come."
Off with his son George’s head!,Off with his son George’s head!
After the battle let George Stanley die.,"My lord, the enemy has already passed the marsh. Let George Stanley die after the battle."
"A thousand hearts are great within my bosom. Advance our standards. Set upon our foes. Our ancient word of courage, fair Saint George, Upon them! Victory sits on our helms.","A thousand hearts beat in my chest. Let’s advance our flags, set upon our enemies, and have our ancient saint of courage, good Saint George, inspire us with the fury of fiery dragons! Let’s go! Victory is with us."
"Rescue, my lord of Norfolk, rescue, rescue! The king enacts more wonders than a man, Daring an opposite to every danger. His horse is slain, and all on foot he fights, Rescue, fair lord, or else the day is lost!","Help, my lord of Norfolk, help, help! The king performs more wonders than seem humanly possible, challenging every enemy he sees. His horse is killed, so he’s fighting on foot, risking his life to search out Richmond. Help, dear lord, or the battle will be lost!"
"A horse, a horse, my kingdom for a horse!","A horse, a horse, I’d give my kingdom for a horse!"
"Withdraw, my lord. I’ll help you to a horse.","Get off the field, my lord. I’ll find you another horse."
"Slave, I have set my life upon a cast, I think there be six Richmonds in the field; Five have I slain today instead of him. A horse, a horse, my kingdom for a horse!","Peasant, I have gambled my life on this one throw of the dice, and I’m willing to take what comes. I think there are six Richmonds on the field. I’ve killed five that looked like him, anyway. A horse, a horse! I’d give my kingdom for a horse!"
"God and your arms be praised, victorious friends! The day is ours; the bloody dog is dead.","God and your work be praised, victorious friends. The day is ours. The bloody dog is dead."
"(offering him the crown) Courageous Richmond, well hast thou acquit thee. From the dead temples of this bloody wretch Have I plucked off, to grace thy brows withal. Wear it, enjoy it, and make much of it.","(offering him the crown) Courageous Richmond, you fought well. Here, I’ve taken back the stolen crown from that violent lowlife so it can grace your brows. Wear it, enjoy it, and make much of it."
"Great God of heaven, say amen to all!","Great God of heaven, say amen to all this! But, tell me, is young George Stanley alive?"
"He is, my lord, and safe in Leicester town, Whither, if it please you, we may now withdraw us.","He is, my lord, and safe in Leicester, where, if you’d like, we can retreat to."
What men of name are slain on either side?,Which gentlemen on each side have been killed?
"John Duke of Norfolk, Walter, Lord Ferrers,","John Duke of Norfolk, Walter Lord Ferrers, Sir Robert Brakenbury, and Sir William Brandon."
"Inter their bodies as becomes their births. Proclaim a pardon to the soldiers fled That in submission will return to us. And then, as we have ta'en the sacrament,","Bury them in a manner appropriate to their noble births. Proclaim that I’ll pardon the soldiers who fled if they will return and submit to my rule. As I vowed, I will unite the York and Lancaster families."
"Smile heaven upon this fair conjunction, That long have frowned upon their enmity. What traitor hears me and says not “Amen?” England hath long been mad and scarred herself. The father rashly slaughtered his own son. The son, compelled, been butcher to the sire. All this divided York and Lancaster, Divided, in their dire division. The true succeeders of each royal house, By God’s fair ordinance conjoin together, And let their heirs, God, if thy will be so. Enrich the time to come with smooth-faced peace, Abate the edge of traitors, gracious Lord, That would reduce these bloody days again, And make poor England weep in streams of blood! Let them not live to taste this land’s increase, Now civil wounds are stopped, peace lives again. That she may long live here, God say amen.","Heaven, for a long time you have frowned upon the hatred between them. Smile, then, on this beautiful union. What traitor hears me and doesn’t say amen? England has long been so crazy that she was willing to hurt herself, brothers blindly shed their brothers' blood, fathers rashly slaughtered their own sons, sons were forced to butcher their fathers. All this further divided the two families, which were already so badly divided. Now let Richmond and Elizabeth, the true heirs of each royal house, be joined together! And let their heirs, if you are willing, God, enrich the future with peace and plenty! Gracious Lord, blunt the swords of those traitors who mean to tear poor England apart again! Let those who would mar this fair land’s peace with treason die before they can enjoy its wealth. Civil wounds now can heal, and peace can live again. So that England may live a long life like this, let God say amen!"
