"Old John of Gaunt, time-honour’d Lancaster, Hast thou, according to thy oath and band, Brought hither Henry Hereford thy bold son, Here to make good the boisterous late appeal, Against the Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Mowbray?","Old John of Gaunt, did you do as you promised and bring your brave son Henry here? I’d like to hear the violent accusation he wanted to make against the Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Mowbray, which I didn’t have time for earlier."
"I have, my liege.","I’ve brought him, my lord."
"Tell me, moreover, hast thou sounded him, If he appeal the duke on ancient malice; On some known ground of treachery in him?","Have you asked him if the source of his complaint is an old feud, or if he knows of some treason the duke has committed?"
"As near as I could sift him on that argument, On some apparent danger seen in him Aim’d at your highness, no inveterate malice.","As far as I could tell, it’s not some personal malice. My son believes that the duke means to harm you in some way."
"And frowning brow to brow, ourselves will hear The accuser and the accused freely speak: High-stomach’d are they both, and full of ire, In rage deaf as the sea, hasty as fire.",Then call them both in to see me. I want to hear in person what each has to say. They’re both so proud and full of anger that they act recklessly and don’t listen to reason.
"My gracious sovereign, my most loving liege!","May you have many years of happiness, my gracious and loving lord."
"Each day still better other’s happiness; Until the heavens, envying earth’s good hap, Add an immortal title to your crown!","May each day be happier than the last, and heaven give you immortality!"
"As well appeareth by the cause you come; Namely to appeal each other of high treason. Cousin of Hereford, what dost thou object Against the Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Mowbray?","Thank you both. But I know one of you isn’t sincere since each of you accuses the other of treason against me. Henry of Hereford, what do you have to say against the Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Mowbray?"
"In the devotion of a subject’s love, Tendering the precious safety of my prince, And free from other misbegotten hate, Come I appellant to this princely presence. And mark my greeting well; for what I speak My body shall make good upon this earth, Or my divine soul answer it in heaven. Thou art a traitor and a miscreant, Since the more fair and crystal is the sky, The uglier seem the clouds that in it fly. Once more, the more to aggravate the note, With a foul traitor’s name stuff I thy throat; What my tongue speaks my right drawn sword may prove.","First, may heaven be my witness! I’ve come here as an accuser because I am a devoted subject who cares for the safety of my prince, not because of any other prejudice against the duke. Now, Thomas Mowbray, I will turn to you. Pay attention to this. I will prove that what I am about to say is true, either with my body here on earth or with my immortal soul in heaven. You are a traitor and a villain, born into too good a family to be so and too bad to live. The more beautiful the sky, the uglier the clouds look. Once more, to emphasize my accusation, I call you a traitor. And with my king’s permission, I’d like to follow what I say with my sword."
"Let not my cold words here accuse my zeal: Tis not the trial of a woman’s war, The bitter clamour of two eager tongues, The blood is hot that must be cool’d for this: Yet can I not of such tame patience boast As to be hush’d and nought at all to say: First, the fair reverence of your highness curbs me Which else would post until it had return’d These terms of treason doubled down his throat. Setting aside his high blood’s royalty, And let him be no kinsman to my liege, Call him a slanderous coward and a villain: Which to maintain I would allow him odds, And meet him, were I tied to run afoot Even to the frozen ridges of the Alps, Where ever Englishman durst set his foot. Mean time let this defend my loyalty, By all my hopes, most falsely doth he lie.","Don’t let my calm words cast doubt on my loyalty. I know that angry words will not settle this argument, so I’ll try to keep myself under control. But I can’t be so calm as to not say anything in my own defense. First, my respect for you, my king, prevents me from saying what I want and throwing those charges of treason right back at Bolingbroke. I defy him and spit on him as if he weren’t your relative, my lord. He’s a trash-talking coward and a villain, and I’d back up those charges in a duel, even if I gave him an advantage by handicapping myself. For now, I’ve defended my loyalty and made it known that he lies."
"Pale trembling coward, there I throw my gage, And lay aside my high blood’s royalty, Which fear, not reverence, makes thee to except. If guilty dread have left thee so much strength As to take up mine honour’s pawn, then stoop: Will I make good against thee, arm to arm, What I have spoke, or thou canst worse devise.","You pale coward. There I’ll throw my glove in challenge to you and set aside my relationship to the king and my royal blood. It’s fear—not respect for the king’s bloodline—that keeps you quiet. If your guilt has given you the guts to accept my challenge, then pick up my glove. I’ll show your cowardice and treason by defeating you in knightly combat."
"I take it up; and by that sword I swear Which gently laid my knighthood on my shoulder, Or chivalrous design of knightly trial: And when I mount, alive may I not light, If I be traitor or unjustly fight!","I’ll take that challenge. And I promise, by my knighthood, that I’ll fight you fairly in whatever contest you wish. And when I mount my horse, let me not dismount alive if I’m a traitor or if I cheat in any way!"
What doth our cousin lay to Mowbray’s charge? So much as of a thought of ill in him.,"What do you accuse Mowbray of, my cousin? It will have to be something terrible if it’s going to make me think badly of him in any way."
"Look, what I speak, my life shall prove it true; That Mowbray hath received eight thousand nobles In name of lendings for your highness’ soldiers, Like a false traitor and injurious villain. Besides I say and will in battle prove, Or here or elsewhere to the furthest verge That ever was survey’d by English eye, Complotted and contrived in this land Fetch from false Mowbray their first head and spring. Further I say and further will maintain Upon his bad life to make all this good, Suggest his soon-believing adversaries, And consequently, like a traitor coward, Sluiced out his innocent soul through streams of blood: Which blood, like sacrificing Abel’s, cries, To me for justice and rough chastisement; And, by the glorious worth of my descent, This arm shall do it, or this life be spent.","I’ll prove with my life that what I say is true. Mowbray has received eight thousand gold coins that he was supposed to pay to your soldiers as advances on their wages. But he’s used the money improperly, just like a traitor and harmful villain would. Even more, I declare and will prove in battle that all treasonous plots over the past eighteen years originated with Mowbray. And further, I know that he caused the death of the Duke of Gloucester by encouraging the duke’s easily influenced enemies, like any coward would, to slay the innocent duke. The duke was murdered like Abel Refers to the biblical story of Cain and Abel, in which Cain kills his brother Abel out of jealousy. Abel , and his blood demands that I seek revenge and justice. By my own good name, I’ll inflict that justice on Mowbray or die trying."
How high a pitch his resolution soars!,"He is so determined! Thomas, how do you respond?"
"O, let my sovereign turn away his face And bid his ears a little while be deaf, Till I have told this slander of his blood, How God and good men hate so foul a liar.","I wish you would turn away and not listen till I’ve told this fellow, who disgraces his bloodline, how much God and good men hate liars like him."
"Were he my brother, nay, my kingdom’s heir, As he is but my father’s brother’s son, Now, by my sceptre’s awe, I make a vow, Such neighbour nearness to our sacred blood The unstooping firmness of my upright soul: He is our subject, Mowbray; so art thou: Free speech and fearless I to thee allow.","Mowbray, my eyes and ears are impartial, even if he were my brother, or even my heir, rather than just my cousin. I vow on my scepter that his relation to me doesn’t give him any advantage or prejudice me in his favor. He’s my subject, Mowbray, and so are you, so speak freely and without fear."
"Then, Bolingbroke, as low as to thy heart, Three parts of that receipt I had for Calais Disbursed I duly to his highness’ soldiers; The other part reserved I by consent, For that my sovereign liege was in my debt Since last I went to France to fetch his queen: Now swallow down that lie. For Gloucester’s death, I slew him not; but to my own disgrace Neglected my sworn duty in that case. The honourable father to my foe Once did I lay an ambush for your life, A trespass that doth vex my grieved soul But ere I last received the sacrament Your grace’s pardon, and I hope I had it. This is my fault: as for the rest appeall’d, It issues from the rancour of a villain, A recreant and most degenerate traitor And interchangeably hurl down my gage Upon this overweening traitor’s foot, To prove myself a loyal gentleman Even in the best blood chamber’d in his bosom. Your highness to assign our trial day.","Then, Bolingbroke, you lie from your heart up through your false throat. I gave three quarters of the money I received to the king’s soldiers. The other quarter I had permission to keep, because I was owed the money for my service in going to fetch the queen from France. Now take back your lie. As for Gloucester, I didn’t kill him, but I admit I disgracefully neglected my duty. I once laid in wait to kill you, my noble lord of Lancaster, the father of my enemy. It was a terrible sin and troubles me greatly. But I confessed it already and specifically begged your pardon, and I hoped you had forgiven me. That is my fault. As for the rest of the charges, they come from a villain’s evil nature, and I’ll defend myself against this faithless and cowardly traitor. I’ll throw my glove down onto this arrogant traitor’s foot, and I’ll show that I’m loyal even compared to this member of the royal bloodline. I therefore pray that your highness will assign a day for our duel soon."
"Wrath-kindled gentlemen, be ruled by me; Let’s purge this choler without letting blood: This we prescribe, though no physician; Forget, forgive; conclude and be agreed; Our doctors say this is no month to bleed. Good uncle, let this end where it begun; We’ll calm the Duke of Norfolk, you your son.","Obey what I say, my hot-headed gentlemen. Let’s settle this feud without violence. Such fierce anger causes too great an injury. Forget it and forgive each other. Come to terms and agree to put this to an end. The astrologers have said that this is no month to shed blood. Good uncle, let’s end this now. I’ll calm down the Duke of Norfolk. You calm down your son."
"Throw down, my son, the Duke of Norfolk’s gage.","For someone my age it is appropriate to make peace. My son, throw down the Duke of Norfolk’s glove."
"And, Norfolk, throw down his.","And Norfolk, throw down his."
"When, Harry, when? Obedience bids I should not bid again.","Come on, Henry, when are you going to do it? I shouldn’t have to ask you again."
"Norfolk, throw down, we bid; there is no boot.","Throw it down, Norfolk, I’m telling you. There is no advantage in refusing."
"Myself I throw, dread sovereign, at thy foot. My life thou shalt command, but not my shame: The one my duty owes; but my fair name, Despite of death that lives upon my grave, I am disgraced, impeach’d and baffled here, Pierced to the soul with slander’s venom’d spear, The which no balm can cure but his heart-blood Which breathed this poison.","I’ll throw myself at your feet, most revered king. You may command my life but not my shame. I owe you my life out of duty, but I cannot, even under pain of death, let you order this dishonor of my good reputation. I am accused and disgraced publicly here, pierced by the venom of slander. The only thing that will ease that pain is to kill the man who uttered these poisonous words."
Give me his gage: lions make leopards tame.,"Such rage should be resisted. Give me his glove. I, as king, will tame these lesser nobles."
"Yea, but not change his spots: take but my shame. And I resign my gage. My dear dear lord, The purest treasure mortal times afford Men are but gilded loam or painted clay. A jewel in a ten-times-barr’d-up chest Is a bold spirit in a loyal breast. Mine honour is my life; both grow in one: Then, dear my liege, mine honour let me try; In that I live and for that will I die.","Yes, but you won’t take away the stain of these charges. If you’ll clear my name, I’ll give up my glove. My dear, dear lord, the greatest treasure in our earthly lives is to have a good reputation. Without that, men are nothing. To have a brave spirit is as valuable as a well-guarded jewel. My honor is my life. One is inseparable from the other. Take my honor, and my life is over. So, my lord, let me prove my honor, since I live for it and I will die for it."
"Cousin, throw up your gage; do you begin.","Cousin, take up your glove. Be the one to start."
"O, God defend my soul from such deep sin! Or with pale beggar-fear impeach my height Before this out-dared dastard? Ere my tongue Shall wound my honour with such feeble wrong, Or sound so base a parle, my teeth shall tear And spit it bleeding in his high disgrace, Where shame doth harbour, even in Mowbray’s face.","Oh, God, keep me from such a terrible sin! Should I appear humbled in front of my father? Or discredit my rank out of fear before this terrified coward? Before I’d let my tongue utter such lies against my honor or make such a false truce, I’d rip it apart with my teeth and spit it into Mowbray’s shameful face."
"We were not born to sue, but to command; Which since we cannot do to make you friends, At Coventry, upon Saint Lambert’s day: There shall your swords and lances arbitrate The swelling difference of your settled hate: Since we can not atone you, we shall see Lord marshal, command our officers at arms Be ready to direct these home alarms.","I was born to command, not to beg. But since I can’t order you to be friends, be ready to settle this feud with your lives at Coventry on Saint Lambert’s day September . Saint Lambert’s day . Then you can let your weapons resolve this hatred, since I can’t bring you to terms. Justice will be on the side of the winner. Lord marshal, tell my officers to be ready to control these domestic disturbances."
"Alas, the part I had in Woodstock’s blood Doth more solicit me than your exclaims, To stir against the butchers of his life! But since correction lieth in those hands Put we our quarrel to the will of heaven; Who, when they see the hours ripe on earth, Will rain hot vengeance on offenders’ heads.","Even more than your uproar, it’s the fact that the Duke of Gloucester was my brother that makes me want to act against his murderers. But since it was Richard who was responsible for the murder in the first place and also controls how it will be avenged, I’ll have to trust in the will of heaven to bring justice to my brother’s killers."
"Finds brotherhood in thee no sharper spur? Edward’s seven sons, whereof thyself art one, Were as seven vials of his sacred blood, Or seven fair branches springing from one root: Some of those seven are dried by nature’s course, But Thomas, my dear lord, my life, my Gloucester, One vial full of Edward’s sacred blood, One flourishing branch of his most royal root, Is crack’d, and all the precious liquor spilt, By envy’s hand and murder’s bloody axe. Ah, Gaunt, his blood was thine! that bed, that womb, That metal, that self-mould, that fashion’d thee Made him a man; and though thou livest and breathest, In some large measure to thy father’s death, In that thou seest thy wretched brother die, Who was the model of thy father’s life. Call it not patience, Gaunt; it is despair: Thou showest the naked pathway to thy life, Teaching stern murder how to butcher thee: That which in mean men we intitle patience Is pale cold cowardice in noble breasts. The best way is to venge my Gloucester’s death.","Don’t you feel compelled to do more since he was your brother? Is there no passion in your love for him? Your father Edward Edward III, who was king of England from to . Edward treasured you and your six brothers. Some of you died natural deaths, and some of your lives were cut short. But Thomas, who was my love and one of Edward’s precious sons, is dead, killed by people who hated him. Oh, Gaunt, he was your own blood! The same mother and father who made you made him, and though you live and breathe, a part of you died with him. And because your father was the model for him, by watching him die you have in a sense consented to see your father die. You aren’t being patient. You’re giving up. In allowing your brother to be murdered, you have shown how you yourself might be killed. What we might call patience in common men is simply cowardice in noble men. What else can I say? The best way to protect your own life is to get revenge for Gloucester’s death."
"God’s is the quarrel; for God’s substitute, His deputy anointed in His sight, Hath caused his death: the which if wrongfully, An angry arm against His minister.","It’s God’s quarrel now, because it was his chosen king, who serves as God’s deputy on earth, who caused Gloucester’s death. If it was a crime, let heaven punish it, because I won’t raise a hand against God’s minister."
"Where then, alas, may I complain myself?",Whom should I complain to then?
"To God, the widow’s champion and defence.","To God, who defends widows."
"Why, then, I will. Farewell, old Gaunt. Our cousin Hereford and fell Mowbray fight: O, sit my husband’s wrongs on Hereford’s spear, That it may enter butcher Mowbray’s breast! Or, if misfortune miss the first career, They may break his foaming courser’s back, And throw the rider headlong in the lists, A caitiff recreant to my cousin Hereford! Farewell, old Gaunt: thy sometimes brother’s wife","Why then, I will. Goodbye, old Gaunt. You are going to Coventry to see our kinsman Hereford and ruthless Mowbray fight. I hope that the weight of the crime against my husband will give force to Hereford’s spear, letting it pierce the killer Mowbray’s breast! Or, if he misses in the first attempt, that Mowbray’s sins weigh so heavily on him that his horse’s back breaks and throws him to the ground! Goodbye, old Gaunt. My grief is so great that I must end my life."
"Sister, farewell; I must to Coventry: As much good stay with thee as go with me!","Sister, goodbye. I have to go to Coventry. May we both fare well!"
"Yet one word more: grief boundeth where it falls, Not with the empty hollowness, but weight: For sorrow ends not when it seemeth done. Commend me to thy brother, Edmund York. Lo, this is all:—nay, yet depart not so; Though this be all, do not so quickly go; With all good speed at Plashy visit me. Alack, and what shall good old York there see But empty lodgings and unfurnish’d walls, Unpeopled offices, untrodden stones? Therefore commend me; let him not come there, To seek out sorrow that dwells every where. Desolate, desolate, will I hence and die: The last leave of thee takes my weeping eye.","Just one more word. When grief falls, it rises again, even though it is heavy and not light and empty. I’ve said goodbye before I said everything that I wanted to say. Give my respects to your brother, Edmund York. That’s all, but wait—don’t leave yet! I’ll think of something else. Tell him—what?—tell him to visit me at Plashy soon. Alas, what will he see there but empty servants’ quarters, bare walls, and floors that no one walks on? What will he hear as a welcome but my groans? So give my greetings, but don’t tell him to visit me there, since he can find sorrow easily enough elsewhere. I’ll go and die alone, and now I weep, having to finally say goodbye to you."
"My Lord Aumerle, is Harry Hereford arm’d?","My Lord Aumerle, does Harry Hereford have his weapons?"
"Yea, at all points; and longs to enter in.","Yes, completely, and he wants to begin."
"The Duke of Norfolk, sprightfully and bold, Stays but the summons of the appellant’s trumpet.",The spirited and bold Duke of Norfolk is just waiting for his accuser’s summons.
For nothing but his majesty’s approach.,"Why, then, they are both ready, and we’re only waiting on the king’s entrance."
"Marshal, demand of yonder champion The cause of his arrival here in arms: Ask him his name and orderly proceed","Marshal, ask the combatant why he’s come here with weapons. Ask him his name and make him swear in accordance with the rules that his mission is one of justice."
"In God’s name and the king’s, say who thou art And why thou comest thus knightly clad in arms, Against what man thou comest, and what thy quarrel: Speak truly, on thy knighthood and thy oath;","In God’s name and the king’s, tell us who you are and why you have come here with armor and weapons. Who is your opponent, and what is your quarrel? Tell us the truth, as you’ve sworn on your knighthood. Make your defense."
"My name is Thomas Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk; Who hither come engaged by my oath— Which God defend a knight should violate!— Both to defend my loyalty and truth Against the Duke of Hereford that appeals me And, by the grace of God and this mine arm, To prove him, in defending of myself, A traitor to my God, my king, and me:","My name is Thomas Mowbray, the Duke of Norfolk. I’ve come as I had sworn to— God forbid a knight breaks his oath! I’m here both to defend my loyalty and the truth of my testimony to God, my king, and any children that I might have. With the grace of God and my ability to fight, I’ll prove that my opponent, the Duke of Hereford, is a traitor to God, the king, and to me. And may heaven protect me, since I fight with honor!"
"Marshal, ask yonder knight in arms, Both who he is and why he cometh hither Thus plated in habiliments of war, And formally, according to our law,","Marshal, ask that knight who he is and why he is here armed for war. Make him formally testify as to the reason he is here to fight, as our law requires."
"What is thy name? and wherefore comest thou hither, Before King Richard in his royal lists? Against whom comest thou? and what’s thy quarrel? Speak like a true knight, so defend thee heaven!","What is your name, and why do you come here in front of King Richard? Who is your opponent? What is your quarrel? Speak like a true knight!"
"Am I; who ready here do stand in arms, To prove, by God’s grace and my body’s valour, In lists, on Thomas Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk, That he is a traitor, foul and dangerous, And as I truly fight, defend me heaven!","I am Harry of Hereford, Lancaster, and Derby. I am ready to prove with my weapons, with God’s grace, and with my strength that Thomas Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk, is a foul traitor, dangerous to King Richard and to me. May heaven defend me, since I fight for truth!"
"On pain of death, no person be so bold Or daring-hardy as to touch the lists, Except the marshal and such officers","Only the marshal and the appointed officials may direct the proceedings, and any other person foolish enough to enter the field will be put to death."
"Lord marshal, let me kiss my sovereign’s hand, And bow my knee before his majesty: For Mowbray and myself are like two men That vow a long and weary pilgrimage; And loving farewell of our several friends.","Lord marshal, let me kiss the king’s hand and go on my knee before him. Mowbray and I are about to undertake a challenge similar to a long and difficult journey, so we should say a formal goodbye to our friends."
"The appellant in all duty greets your highness, And craves to kiss your hand and take his leave.",The accuser greets your highness and asks to kiss your hand and say goodbye.
"We will descend and fold him in our arms. So be thy fortune in this royal fight! Farewell, my blood; which if to-day thou shed, Lament we may, but not revenge thee dead.","I’ll step down and embrace him. Cousin of Hereford, insofar as your cause is just, I wish you luck in this fight. Goodbye, my cousin. If you die in this fight, I will grieve, but I won’t take revenge."
"O let no noble eye profane a tear As confident as is the falcon’s flight Against a bird, do I with Mowbray fight. My loving lord, I take my leave of you; Of you, my noble cousin, Lord Aumerle; But lusty, young, and cheerly drawing breath. Lo, as at English feasts, so I regreet The daintiest last, to make the end most sweet: O thou, the earthly author of my blood, Doth with a twofold vigour lift me up To reach at victory above my head, Add proof unto mine armour with thy prayers; And with thy blessings steel my lance’s point, And furbish new the name of John a Gaunt, Even in the lusty havior of his son.","If I am pierced by Mowbray’s lance, don’t misuse your tears for me. I’m as confident as the hawk is when he hunts the sparrow. My loving king, goodbye, and goodbye my cousin, Lord Aumerle. I’m healthy, young, and alive now, even if I’m close to death. Lastly, I’ll say farewell to you, my father, just as at a feast I save the best morsel for the end. Oh my creator, your youthful spirit is reborn in me and energizes me to reach for victory. Give strength to my armor with your prayers, and harden my lance with your blessing, so it will pierce Mowbray’s coat of armor. May my brave deeds bring new honor to the name of John of Gaunt."
"God in thy good cause make thee prosperous! Be swift like lightning in the execution; Fall like amazing thunder on the casque Of thy adverse pernicious enemy: Rouse up thy youthful blood, be valiant and live.","May God give you success in your good cause! Strike as quick as lightning, and let your blows fall like thunder on the helmet of your enemy. Be courageous and fierce, and stay alive."
Mine innocency and Saint George to thrive!,My innocence and Saint George will protect me!
"There lives or dies, true to King Richard’s throne, A loyal, just and upright gentleman: Never did captive with a freer heart Cast off his chains of bondage and embrace More than my dancing soul doth celebrate This feast of battle with mine adversary. Most mighty liege, and my companion peers, Take from my mouth the wish of happy years: Go I to fight: truth hath a quiet breast.","Whatever God or fate has in store for me, I will live or die as a loyal, just, and honest gentleman. I joyfully celebrate this battle against my enemy, as much as any slave celebrates who takes off his chains and becomes free. Most powerful king and my friends, I wish you all happiness in the years to come. I go to fight as happily as I would join in a celebration, because knowing that I have truth on my side makes me feel calm."
"Farewell, my lord: securely I espy Virtue with valour couched in thine eye. Order the trial, marshal, and begin.","Goodbye, my lord. I see both virtue and courage in you. Marshal, let’s begin."
Receive thy lance; and God defend the right!,"Henry of Hereford, Lancaster, and Derby, take your lance. May God defend the right man!"
"Strong as a tower in hope, I cry amen.","With strength and hope, I say, Amen."
"Go bear this lance to Thomas, Duke of Norfolk.","Take this lance to Thomas, Duke of Norfolk."
"Harry of Hereford, Lancaster and Derby, On pain to be found false and recreant, To prove the Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Mowbray, A traitor to his God, his king and him; And dares him to set forward to the fight.","At the risk of being proved false, here stands Henry of Hereford, Lancaster, and Derby to demonstrate that the Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Mowbray, is a traitor to his God, his king, and to him. He dares him to step forward and fight."
"On pain to be found false and recreant, Both to defend himself and to approve Henry of Hereford, Lancaster, and Derby, To God, his sovereign and to him disloyal; Attending but the signal to begin.","At the risk of being proved false, here stands Thomas Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk, to defend himself and to prove that Henry of Hereford is disloyal to God, his king, and to him. By his own free will and with courage, he waits for the signal to begin."
"Sound, trumpets; and set forward, combatants.","Trumpets, play. Step forward, combatants."
"Stay, the king hath thrown his warder down.","Stop, the king has thrown down his baton."
"Let them lay by their helmets and their spears, Withdraw with us: and let the trumpets sound While we return these dukes what we decree.","Tell them to take off their helmets, lay down their spears, and come back to their chairs by me. Tell the trumpets to play until I deliver my decree to these men."
"Draw near, And list what with our council we have done. With that dear blood which it hath fostered; And for our eyes do hate the dire aspect Of civil wounds plough’d up with neighbours’ sword; And for we think the eagle-winged pride With rival-hating envy, set on you To wake our peace, which in our country’s cradle Draws the sweet infant breath of gentle sleep; Which so roused up with boisterous untuned drums, And grating shock of wrathful iron arms, Might from our quiet confines fright fair peace And make us wade even in our kindred’s blood, Therefore, we banish you our territories: Till twice five summers have enrich’d our fields Shall not regreet our fair dominions, But tread the stranger paths of banishment.","Draw near, and listen to what I have devised with my council. Our kingdom, where you both grew up, should not be soiled with your blood, and I hate the spectacle of settling such quarrels with swords. I think that pride, ambition, and envy have caused you to disturb the sweet peace of this country. Once that peace is broken by war drums and the clash of weapons, relatives will be killing each other. Therefore, I’m sending you out into distant territories. You, my cousin Hereford, at the threat of execution if you return, are banished for ten years."
"Your will be done: this must my comfort be, And those his golden beams to you here lent Shall point on me and gild my banishment.",I will do as you command. My comfort in my banishment will be the thought that the same sun that shines on you will shine on me wherever I am.
"Norfolk, for thee remains a heavier doom, Which I with some unwillingness pronounce: The dateless limit of thy dear exile; The hopeless word of ‘never to return’ Breathe I against thee, upon pain of life.","Norfolk, I reluctantly must give you a harsher sentence. Your absence won’t be marked by a certain number of hours. I must banish you for life."
"A heavy sentence, my most sovereign liege, A dearer merit, not so deep a maim As to be cast forth in the common air, Have I deserved at your highness’ hands. The language I have learn’d these forty years, And now my tongue’s use is to me no more Than an unstringed viol or a harp, Or like a cunning instrument cased up, Or, being open, put into his hands Within my mouth you have engaol’d my tongue, Doubly portcullis’d with my teeth and lips; And dull unfeeling barren ignorance Is made my gaoler to attend on me. Too far in years to be a pupil now: What is thy sentence then but speechless death, Which robs my tongue from breathing native breath?","It’s a heavy sentence, my lord, and I didn’t expect to hear you say that. I deserved to be rewarded, not punished so harshly with exile. I’ll have to abandon my native English language, which I’ve spoken for forty years. My tongue will be of as little use as a broken violin. You’ve imprisoned it, and ignorance will be my jailer. I’m too old to learn anything new. You’ve sentenced me to die in silence."
It boots thee not to be compassionate:,"It doesn’t help to despair, and once my sentence is handed out it is too late to lament."
"Then thus I turn me from my country’s light, To dwell in solemn shades of endless night.",Then I’ll turn away from the light of this country and resign myself to darkness.
"Return again, and take an oath with thee. Lay on our royal sword your banish’d hands; Our part therein we banish with yourselves— To keep the oath that we administer: You never shall, so help you truth and God! Embrace each other’s love in banishment; Nor never write, regreet, nor reconcile This louring tempest of your home-bred hate; Nor never by advised purpose meet To plot, contrive, or complot any ill","Come back, and take an oath. Put your hands on my sword and swear this by your duty to God—since your duty to me will end with your banishment—that you will never greet each other in exile, or write to each other, or make up with each other, and that you won’t plot any foul deed against me, my country, my subjects, or any of my land."
I swear.,I swear.
"And I, to keep all this.",So do I.
"Norfolk, so far as to mine enemy:— By this time, had the king permitted us, Banish’d this frail sepulchre of our flesh, As now our flesh is banish’d from this land: Confess thy treasons ere thou fly the realm; Since thou hast far to go, bear not along","If the king had allowed us to fight, Norfolk my enemy, one of us would be dead by now. One of our souls would have been banished from its body, just as our bodies are now banished from this country. Confess your treason before you go. Don’t take the cumbersome burden of those sins with you."
"No, Bolingbroke: if ever I were traitor, My name be blotted from the book of life, And I from heaven banish’d as from hence! But what thou art, God, thou, and I do know; Farewell, my liege. Now no way can I stray; Save back to England, all the world’s my way.","No, Bolingbroke. If I were ever a traitor, may I die and be forbidden from heaven! But you and I and God all know what you are, and I fear that the king will find out all too soon—to his sorrow. Goodbye, my lord. Now I’m unable to lose my way, since my way is anywhere in the world other than England."
"Uncle, even in the glasses of thine eyes I see thy grieved heart: thy sad aspect Pluck’d four away.","Uncle, I can see in your eyes how much you are grieving. Since you are so sad, I’ll reduce your son’s exile by four years."
"Six frozen winter spent, Return with welcome home from banishment.","After six years, you will be welcome to come home."
How long a time lies in one little word! End in a word: such is the breath of kings.,How much time is kept in a word! Four slow winters and four lush springs taken away in a word. That’s the power of a king.
"I thank my liege, that in regard of me He shortens four years of my son’s exile: But little vantage shall I reap thereby; Can change their moons and bring their times about My oil-dried lamp and time-bewasted light Shall be extinct with age and endless night; My inch of taper will be burnt and done,","Thank you, my lord, for shortening my son’s exile for my sake. But I won’t gain much by it. By the time six years have passed I will be dead and won’t be able to see my son."
"Why uncle, thou hast many years to live.","Why, uncle, you have many years left to live."
"But not a minute, king, that thou canst give: Shorten my days thou canst with sullen sorrow, And pluck nights from me, but not lend a morrow; But stop no wrinkle in his pilgrimage; Thy word is current with him for my death, But dead, thy kingdom cannot buy my breath.","But you can’t give me an extra minute of life. You can shorten my days by adding this sorrow, but you can’t add any time. You can cause me to furrow my brow, but you can’t stop a wrinkle from forming. You can order my death with a word, but once I’m dead, nothing can be done to give me another breath."
"Thy son is banish’d upon good advice, Why at our justice seem’st thou then to lour?","Banishing your son was a good solution, and you agreed to it. Why now do you look so gloomy at my justice?"
"Things sweet to taste prove in digestion sour. You urged me as a judge; but I had rather You would have bid me argue like a father. To smooth his fault I should have been more mild: A partial slander sought I to avoid, And in the sentence my own life destroy’d. Alas, I look’d when some of you should say, But you gave leave to my unwilling tongue Against my will to do myself this wrong.","Sometimes a thing that tastes sweet later makes you feel sick. You asked me to be a judge, but I would rather have argued as a father. If it had been a stranger rather than my son, I would have been milder. I wanted to avoid seeming soft, and, in the process, destroyed myself. Alas, I expected someone to say I was too strict in banishing my own son, but you let me agree to this terrible decision."
"Cousin, farewell; and, uncle, bid him so: Six years we banish him, and he shall go.","Cousin, farewell. Uncle, say goodbye, too. I’ve banished him for six years, and he must go."
From where you do remain let paper show.,"Cousin, goodbye. Send me a letter telling me where you are, since I won’t be able to hear it from you in person."
"My lord, no leave take I; for I will ride, As far as land will let me, by your side.","My lord, I won’t say goodbye. I’ll ride with you as far as I can."
"O, to what purpose dost thou hoard thy words,",Why are you remaining silent? Won’t you say goodbye to your friends?
"I have too few to take my leave of you, When the tongue’s office should be prodigal To breathe the abundant dolour of the heart.","I should be able to tell you in several ways how sad I feel, but I have no words to express how sad I feel in saying goodbye to you."
Thy grief is but thy absence for a time.,Your grief is just that you’ll be absent for a time.
"Joy absent, grief is present for that time.","With joy gone, grief will take up that whole time."
What is six winters? they are quickly gone.,Six years will go by quickly.
To men in joy; but grief makes one hour ten.,"To a happy man they would pass quickly, but with sorrow one hour feels like ten."
Call it a travel that thou takest for pleasure.,Think of it as a pleasure trip.
"My heart will sigh when I miscall it so,",To pretend it is a vacation will only make it worse.
The sullen passage of thy weary steps Esteem as foil wherein thou art to set The precious jewel of thy home return.,Think of these sorrowful years as a way to make your return home even happier.
"Nay, rather, every tedious stride I make I wander from the jewels that I love. Must I not serve a long apprenticehood To foreign passages, and in the end, Having my freedom, boast of nothing else","No, every step I take away will only remind me how far I am from what I love. I’ll be serving so many long years in a foreign land, and, other than my freedom, I’ll have nothing to show for it at the end."
"All places that the eye of heaven visits Are to a wise man ports and happy havens. Teach thy necessity to reason thus; There is no virtue like necessity. But thou the king. Woe doth the heavier sit, Where it perceives it is but faintly borne. Go, say I sent thee forth to purchase honour And not the king exiled thee; or suppose And thou art flying to a fresher clime: Look what thy soul holds dear, imagine it To lie that way thou go’st, not whence thou comest: Suppose the singing birds musicians, The flowers fair ladies, and thy steps no more Than a delightful measure or a dance; For gnarling sorrow hath less power to bite The man that mocks at it and sets it light.","A wise man knows that anywhere heaven looks down upon is a refuge. Force yourself to think this way, because you have to. Don’t think that the king banished you but rather that you are the king. Sorrow weighs heaviest on those who bear it timidly. Pretend I sent you to go prove yourself, not that the king banished you. Or pretend that there is a plague here and that you are seeking a healthier place. Imagine that what you want the most can be found in the direction you are going, not the direction you’re coming from. Pretend the birds are musicians, and the flowers along your path are fair ladies, and your steps are a dance. Sorrow has no power to hurt the man who makes fun of it and who keeps a sense of humor."
"By thinking on the frosty Caucasus? Or cloy the hungry edge of appetite By bare imagination of a feast? Or wallow naked in December snow O, no! the apprehension of the good Gives but the greater feeling to the worse: Fell sorrow’s tooth doth never rankle more Than when he bites, but lanceth not the sore.","Who can hold a flame by pretending that it is ice? Or satisfy hunger just by thinking about a feast? Or roll in the snow naked by imagining the heat of summer? Oh, no! Imagining the best only makes the worst harder to bear. Sorrow hurts most when you treat the pain it creates without curing the cause."
"Had I thy youth and cause, I would not stay.","Come, come, my son, I’ll put you on your way. If I were young enough, I wouldn’t remain here."
"Then, England’s ground, farewell; sweet soil, adieu; My mother, and my nurse, that bears me yet! Where’er I wander, boast of this I can,","Then goodbye, England’s earth. Goodbye, sweet soil, my motherland. Wherever I go, I can boast that I am a true Englishman, even if I am banished."
"We did observe. Cousin Aumerle, How far brought you high Hereford on his way?",How far did you escort proud Hereford?
"I brought high Hereford, if you call him so, But to the next highway, and there I left him.","I took proud Hereford, if you want to call him that, just to the next highway and left him there."
"And say, what store of parting tears were shed?",And how many tears were shed?
"Faith, none for me; except the north-east wind, Which then blew bitterly against our faces, Awaked the sleeping rheum, and so by chance Did grace our hollow parting with a tear.","Honestly, none on my part. Although the wind was blowing bitterly against our faces, making our eyes water. I suppose by chance that made me shed some tears."
What said our cousin when you parted with him?,What did my cousin say when you left him?
"‘Farewell:’ And, for my heart disdained that my tongue Should so profane the word, that taught me craft To counterfeit oppression of such grief Marry, would the word ‘farewell’ have lengthen’d hours And added years to his short banishment, He should have had a volume of farewells; But since it would not, he had none of me.","“Goodbye.” But I didn’t say it back, because that word has always been a way to disguise my grief when leaving someone, and I certainly didn’t have any grief to disguise this time. In fact, if saying goodbye would have made hours longer and added years to his banishment, I would have given him many goodbyes. But I knew that it wouldn’t, so I gave him none."
"When time shall call him home from banishment, Whether our kinsman come to see his friends. Ourself and Bushy, Bagot here and Green Observed his courtship to the common people; With humble and familiar courtesy, What reverence he did throw away on slaves, Wooing poor craftsmen with the craft of smiles And patient underbearing of his fortune, Off goes his bonnet to an oyster-wench; A brace of draymen bid God speed him well And had the tribute of his supple knee, With ‘Thanks, my countrymen, my loving friends;’ And he our subjects’ next degree in hope.","He is our cousin, cousin. But I doubt that he’ll come see his relatives when he returns home from his exile. Bushy, Bagot, Green, and I watched how he courts the common people, and he seems to endear himself to them with humble courtesy. He wasted reverence on slaves and courted poor craftsman with smiles and a patient acceptance of his fate, as though he were hoping to take their affection with him into exile. He took off his hat to a woman selling oysters. Several oxen drivers blessed his journey, and he went on one knee and told them, “Thanks, my countrymen, my loving friends.” It was as though my England were his and my subjects were placing their hope in him."
"Well, he is gone; and with him go these thoughts. Now for the rebels which stand out in Ireland, Expedient manage must be made, my liege, For their advantage and your highness’ loss.","Well, he is gone, and any thoughts like that go with him. Now we must make an urgent plan to deal with the rebels in Ireland, my lord, before giving them time to act gives them an advantage and puts you at a loss."
"We will ourself in person to this war: And, for our coffers, with too great a court And liberal largess, are grown somewhat light, The revenue whereof shall furnish us For our affairs in hand: if that come short, Our substitutes at home shall have blank charters; Whereto, when they shall know what men are rich, And send them after to supply our wants; For we will make for Ireland presently.","lease out our right to tax the people. The revenue from that will keep the country running. If that doesn’t bring in enough, then my deputies here will have authority to make the rich lords turn over however much of their gold we choose to supply what we need. I’ll leave for Ireland at once."
"Bushy, what news?","Bushy, what is the news?"
"Old John of Gaunt is grievous sick, my lord, To entreat your majesty to visit him.","Old John of Gaunt is suddenly very ill, my lord. He sent word asking that your majesty visit him as soon as possible."
Where lies he?,Where is he?
At Ely House.,At Ely House.
"Now put it, God, in the physician’s mind The lining of his coffers shall make coats To deck our soldiers for these Irish wars. Come, gentlemen, let’s all go visit him: Pray God we may make haste, and come too late!","God, let the physician help him die quickly! His fortune will pay for the soldiers’ coats in this Irish war. Come, gentleman, let’s go visit him. Let’s hurry, but pray we still arrive too late!"
Amen.,Amen.
"Will the king come, that I may breathe my last In wholesome counsel to his unstaid youth?","Is the young, wild king going to come visit me so I can give him my last words of advice before I die?"
"Vex not yourself, nor strive not with your breath; For all in vain comes counsel to his ear.","Don’t waste the little strength you have worrying about that. Even if he did come, the king doesn’t listen to advice."
"Enforce attention like deep harmony: Where words are scarce, they are seldom spent in vain, For they breathe truth that breathe their words in pain. He that no more must say is listen’d more More are men’s ends mark’d than their lives before: The setting sun, and music at the close, As the last taste of sweets, is sweetest last, Writ in remembrance more than things long past: My death’s sad tale may yet undeaf his ear.","Also, in general, people pay more attention at the end of somebody’s life. It’s just like the last bite of dessert—it’s the sweetest part, the part you try to make last, and the part you remember most. So, even though King Richard ignored me throughout my life, maybe he’ll listen to me now that I am dying."
"No; it is stopp’d with other flattering sounds, As praises, of whose taste the wise are feared, Lascivious metres, to whose venom sound Report of fashions in proud Italy, Whose manners still our tardy apish nation Limps after in base imitation. Where doth the world thrust forth a vanity— That is not quickly buzzed into his ears? Then all too late comes counsel to be heard, Where will doth mutiny with wit’s regard. Direct not him whose way himself will choose:","No, he won’t listen—his ears are stuffed with all the sounds that make him happy, like the flattery and praise he receives, which wise men know to be wary of. He also likes raunchy poems, which immature young people always listen to. And he listens to the fashion reports from Italy, which England is always copying and always shamefully trying to catch up to. As long as it is new, no matter how awful it is, it instantly grabs Richard’s attention. His desire for all of these things doesn’t allow him to listen to good advice. Don’t give him direction, because he chooses his own course. You’ll just be wasting your precious breath."
"Methinks I am a prophet new inspired And thus expiring do foretell of him: His rash fierce blaze of riot cannot last, For violent fires soon burn out themselves; He tires betimes that spurs too fast betimes; With eager feeding food doth choke the feeder: Light vanity, insatiate cormorant, Consuming means, soon preys upon itself. This earth of majesty, this seat of Mars, This other Eden, demi-paradise, This fortress built by Nature for herself Against infection and the hand of war, This precious stone set in the silver sea, Which serves it in the office of a wall, Or as a moat defensive to a house, Against the envy of less happier lands, This nurse, this teeming womb of royal kings, Fear’d by their breed and famous by their birth, Renowned for their deeds as far from home, For Christian service and true chivalry, Of the world’s ransom, blessed Mary’s Son, This land of such dear souls, this dear dear land, Dear for her reputation through the world, Is now leased out, I die pronouncing it, England, bound in with the triumphant sea Whose rocky shore beats back the envious siege Of watery Neptune, is now bound in with shame, With inky blots and rotten parchment bonds: Hath made a shameful conquest of itself. Ah, would the scandal vanish with my life, How happy then were my ensuing death!","As I lie here dying, I think that God is suddenly letting me see the king’s future. The king can’t go on living a wasteful lifestyle forever, in the same way that a raging fire will eventually burn itself out. Little rainstorms often go on for a long time, but big, violent thunderstorms come and go quickly. The person who starts off too fast will soon tire out, and the person who eats too fast will choke on his food. The hungry bird that can’t get enough to eat will soon eat itself. This kingdom, this majestic Earth, this paradise, this fortress that Nature built to protect herself against disease and war, this lucky race of people, this little world, this precious jewel of an island sitting in the sea—which protects it like a wall or a moat against the evil intentions of less fortunate countries—this blessed land, this England, this fertile mother of kings who are feared and famous for their Christian actions throughout the world, this land of such good people, this wonderful, wonderful land—it is now rented out, and I’m going to have to die watching it happen. England is surrounded by an ocean whose rocky shore has always pushed back the raging waters. Now, though, England is bound in shame by legal papers, made of rotting parchment and covered in inky blots, that were signed to rent it out. England, which is used to conquering other countries, has now shamefully conquered itself. Oh, how I wish this scandal would die and go away, just like I’m about to die. How happy my death would be then!"
[to John of Gaunt]The king is come: deal mildly with his youth;,"(to John of Guant) The king is here. Go easy with him. He is young and easy to make angry, and if you give him a hard time, you’re likely to do nothing but make him angrier."
"How fares our noble uncle, Lancaster?","How are you, John of Gaunt?"
"What comfort, man? how is’t with aged Gaunt?","Yes, John of Gaunt, tell us how you are."
"O how that name befits my composition! Old Gaunt indeed, and gaunt in being old: And who abstains from meat that is not gaunt? For sleeping England long time have I watch’d; Watching breeds leanness, leanness is all gaunt: The pleasure that some fathers feed upon, And therein fasting, hast thou made me gaunt: Gaunt am I for the grave, gaunt as a grave, Whose hollow womb inherits nought but bones.","My name is Gaunt, and I feel gaunt. I am gaunt because of my old age. And who can go without food and not be gaunt? I have stayed awake and watched England crumble for a long time, and from all the lack of sleep I’ve grown gaunt. Fathers receive nourishment from seeing their children, and since I can’t see my child it has made me gaunt. I’m ready for my grave, and when I’m laid in it I’ll be nothing but bones."
Can sick men play so nicely with their names?,Can men who are really sick play so subtly with their names?
"Since thou dost seek to kill my name in me, I mock my name, great king, to flatter thee.","Misery likes to make fun of itself. And I thought you might enjoy listening to me make fun of my name since you are banishing my son, who, of course, shares my name."
Should dying men flatter with those that live?,Should dying men try to amuse the living?
"No, no, men living flatter those that die.","No, no, the living should try to amuse the dying."
"Thou, now a-dying, say’st thou flatterest me.","You, who are dying, tell me that you’re trying to please me."
"O, no! thou diest, though I the sicker be.","Oh no! You’re the one dying, even though I’m sicker."
"I am in health, I breathe, and see thee ill.","I’m in good health. I’m breathing fine, and I can see that you are the one who is sick."
"Now He that made me knows I see thee ill; Ill in myself to see, and in thee seeing ill. Wherein thou liest in reputation sick; And thou, too careless patient as thou art, Commit’st thy anointed body to the cure Of those physicians that first wounded thee: Whose compass is no bigger than thy head; And yet, incaged in so small a verge, The waste is no whit lesser than thy land. O, had thy grandsire with a prophet’s eye From forth thy reach he would have laid thy shame, Deposing thee before thou wert possess’d, Which art possess’d now to depose thyself. Why, cousin, wert thou regent of the world, But for thy world enjoying but this land, Is it not more than shame to shame it so? Landlord of England art thou now, not king: Thy state of law is bondslave to the law; And thou—","God knows that I can see the sickness in you. You don’t realize it, but your deathbed is actually the country that you’ve been destroying. And you’re too stupid to realize that the people you think will cure you are actually the ones making you sick—those flatterers and yes-men you surround yourself with. You don’t even see that your subjects are turning on you. You have laid waste to all of England. If your grandfather had been able to see how you were going to destroy this country, he would’ve reached into the future and stopped you. My brother, it is an utter shame to lease parts of England out to others. You aren’t the king of England anymore. You are simply the landlord of England, and you—"
"Presuming on an ague’s privilege, Darest with thy frozen admonition Make pale our cheek, chasing the royal blood With fury from his native residence. Wert thou not brother to great Edward’s son, This tongue that runs so roundly in thy head Should run thy head from thy unreverent shoulders.","You idiot, taking advantage of your illness as an opportunity to criticize me. How dare you anger and embarrass me so much that my face has gone pale. If you weren’t my uncle—that is, the uncle to the King of England—that wild tongue of yours would fall from the head that sits on your disobedient shoulders."
"O, spare me not, my brother Edward’s son, That blood already, like the pelican, Hast thou tapp’d out and drunkenly caroused: My brother Gloucester, plain well-meaning soul, Whom fair befal in heaven ’mongst happy souls! That thou respect’st not spilling Edward’s blood: Join with the present sickness that I have; And thy unkindness be like crooked age, To crop at once a too long wither’d flower. These words hereafter thy tormentors be! Convey me to my bed, then to my grave: Love they to live that love and honour have.","Don’t do me any favors because I’m your uncle. You have never before hesitated to spill our family’s royal blood. My good and simple brother Gloucester, who had royal blood and is happily in heaven now, is someone you weren’t afraid to kill. Like a dead flower, your wicked behavior must be plucked immediately. You have lived a bad life, but you must change your ways before you die. May my words torment you always! (to his assistants) Take me to my bed, and then let me die. Let only those who are honorable and loving live happily."
And let them die that age and sullens have;,"And let those who are old and gloomy die, and you, John of Gaunt, are both."
"I do beseech your majesty, impute his words To wayward sickliness and age in him: He loves you, on my life, and holds you dear As Harry Duke of Hereford, were he here.","I beg you, your majesty, blame his words on his age and his sickness. I swear that he loves you and holds you as close to his heart as he does Harry Duke of Hereford."
"As theirs, so mine; and all be as it is.","Right, what you say is true. Just as Harry holds me close to his heart, John of Gaunt must hold me also. And, in turn, I love both of them. That’s how it is."
"My liege, old Gaunt commends him to your majesty.","My lord, Gaunt sends his regards to you."
What says he?,What did he say?
"Nay, nothing; all is said Words, life and all, old Lancaster hath spent.","Actually, he didn’t say anything. He can’t talk. He has died."
"Be York the next that must be bankrupt so! Though death be poor, it ends a mortal woe.","I hope that I will be the next to die! Death is terrible, but at least it stops the pain of living."
"The ripest fruit first falls, and so doth he; So much for that. Now for our Irish wars: We must supplant those rough rug-headed kerns, Which live like venom where no venom else But only they have privilege to live. Towards our assistance we do seize to us The plate, corn, revenues and moveables, Whereof our uncle Gaunt did stand possess’d.","Gaunt is the first to die, just like the ripest fruit is always the first to fall off the tree. Well, that’s over with. Now, about the war in Ireland. We must get rid of those shaggy-haired Irish soldiers who live there. Let’s seize all of Gaunt’s money and property to help pay for the war."
"How long shall I be patient? ah, how long Not Gloucester’s death, nor Hereford’s banishment. Not Gaunt’s rebukes, nor England’s private wrongs, Nor the prevention of poor Bolingbroke About his marriage, nor my own disgrace, Or bend one wrinkle on my sovereign’s face. I am the last of noble Edward’s sons, Of whom thy father, Prince of Wales, was first: In war was never lion raged more fierce, Than was that young and princely gentleman. His face thou hast, for even so look’d he, Accomplish’d with the number of thy hours; But when he frown’d, it was against the French Did will what he did spend and spent not that Which his triumphant father’s hand had won; His hands were guilty of no kindred blood, But bloody with the enemies of his kin. Or else he never would compare between.","How long can I hold out? How long will my obligation to the king make me suffer these wrongs against Gaunt? Nothing has ever made me show my frustrations—not Gloucester’s death, nor Hereford’s banishment, nor Gaunt’s criticisms, nor the king’s bad treatment of England, nor the king’s refusal to let Bolingbroke marry Richard rejected Bolingbroke’s request to marry the King of France’s cousin. king’s refusal to let Bolingbroke marry , nor my own ill treatment. I am the last of Edward’s sons. Your father, the Prince of Wales, was the first. There was never anyone more fierce in wartime and more gentle in peacetime than the Prince of Wales. You look just like him when he was your age. When he got upset, it was against the French, not against his allies. He spent only what he’d earned, and he never spent anything that his father had won. He never did anything wrong to his countrymen, but he punished his enemies. Richard, I am too upset, or I would never make these comparisons."
"Why, uncle, what’s the matter?","Why, uncle, what’s the matter?"
"O my liege, Pardon me, if you please; if not, I, pleased Seek you to seize and gripe into your hands The royalties and rights of banish’d Hereford? Is not Gaunt dead, and doth not Hereford live? Was not Gaunt just, and is not Harry true? Is not his heir a well-deserving son? Take Hereford’s rights away, and take from Time His charters and his customary rights; Let not to-morrow then ensue to-day; But by fair sequence and succession? Now, afore God—God forbid I say true!— If you do wrongfully seize Hereford’s rights, Call in the letters patent that he hath His livery, and deny his offer’d homage, You pluck a thousand dangers on your head, You lose a thousand well-disposed hearts And prick my tender patience, to those thoughts","Oh, my lord, forgive me, please. If you won’t I’ll understand. Do you really want to seize all of Gaunt’s property? He might be dead, but isn’t his son still alive? Wasn’t Gaunt a good man, and isn’t Harry good, too? Doesn’t Gaunt deserve to have an heir? And isn’t Harry a deserving heir? If you take away Harry’s right to inherit his father’s belongings, then you are going against tradition. It would be like taking away Time’s authority and rights and preventing tomorrow from following today. Remember, you yourself are a king because you inherited the position. Now, I swear before God, if you do this, you will bring all sorts of danger to yourself and turn a thousand people against you. You will force me to lose my patience, and I’ll think about doing things to you that, because I still honor and obey you, I cannot even think about."
"Think what you will, we seize into our hands His plate, his goods, his money and his lands.","Think whatever you want, but we’re going to seize his money and all of his property."
"I’ll not be by the while: my liege, farewell: What will ensue hereof, there’s none can tell; That their events can never fall out good.","I won’t stand here and watch. Goodbye, my lord. What will happen now, nobody can say. But no good outcome can result from bad decisions like this."
"Go, Bushy, to the Earl of Wiltshire straight: Bid him repair to us to Ely House To see this business. To-morrow next And we create, in absence of ourself, Our uncle York lord governor of England; For he is just and always loved us well. Come on, our queen: to-morrow must we part;","Bushy, go straight to the Earl of Wiltshire and tell him to come to Ely House to help us. Tomorrow morning we’ll go to Ireland. I believe it’s time. I’ll make my uncle York the Lord Governor of England while I’m away. He is fair and has always loved me very much. Come, my queen, we must leave tomorrow. Be well."
"Well, lords, the Duke of Lancaster is dead.","Well, lords, the Duke of Lancaster is dead."
And living too; for now his son is duke.,But he also kind of lives because his son is now a duke.
"Barely in title, not in revenue.","His son might have the title of duke, but he doesn’t have the income of one."
"Richly in both, if justice had her right.",If there were justice in the world then he would both have the title and the income.
Ere’t be disburden’d with a liberal tongue.,I have a lot of troubles on my mind. But I must keep silent about them for now.
"Nay, speak thy mind; and let him ne’er speak more That speaks thy words again to do thee harm!","Speak your mind. And if anyone uses what you say against you, let that person never speak again!"
Tends that thou wouldst speak to the Duke of Hereford? Quick is mine ear to hear of good towards him.,"Are you going to say something about the Duke of Hereford? If so, say it, man! I am always eager to hear good things about him."
"No good at all that I can do for him; Unless you call it good to pity him, Bereft and gelded of his patrimony.","I can’t do him any good, unless it’s good to pity him, since he’s now deprived of his inheritance."
"In him, a royal prince, and many moe Of noble blood in this declining land. The king is not himself, but basely led By flatterers; and what they will inform, That will the king severely prosecute ’Gainst us, our lives, our children, and our heirs.","With God as my witness, I say it’s a shame that such wrongs have been done to him and to others of royal blood in this crumbling land. The king is not acting like himself. He’s being deceived by his group of flatterers. Purely out of hatred they make accusations against us, leading the king to persecute us and our children."
"The commons hath he pill’d with grievous taxes, And quite lost their hearts: the nobles hath he fined","He’s taxed the common people heavily, and they’ve turned against him. He’s also fined the nobles for old grudges and turned them against him, as well."
"And daily new exactions are devised, As blanks, benevolences, and I wot not what: But what, o’ God’s name, doth become of this?","Every day he devises new ways of forcing people to pay, like mandatory loans and I don’t know what else. What, in God’s name, is he doing with all of this money?"
"Wars have not wasted it, for warr’d he hath not, That which his noble ancestors achieved with blows: More hath he spent in peace than they in wars.",He hasn’t spent the money on wars because he hasn’t waged any wars. He has shamefully compromised with our enemies and given away what our ancestors won in battle. He’s spent more in peacetime than they did in wartime.
The Earl of Wiltshire hath the realm in farm.,The Earl of Wiltshire has rented out the land.
"The king’s grown bankrupt, like a broken man.",The king is bankrupt.
Reproach and dissolution hangeth over him.,He is disgraced.
"He hath not money for these Irish wars, His burthenous taxations notwithstanding, But by the robbing of the banish’d duke.","The only way he can afford to fight the war in Ireland, even with all the money that he’s collected from these new taxes, is by stealing everything from the Duke of Hereford."
"His noble kinsman: most degenerate king! Yet see no shelter to avoid the storm; We see the wind sit sore upon our sails, And yet we strike not, but securely perish.","Friends, we see this storm coming, and yet we don’t seek any shelter to avoid it! We see the wind blowing fiercely upon our sails, and yet we don’t lower the sails but recklessly perish."
We see the very wreck that we must suffer; For suffering so the causes of our wreck.,"We see the shipwreck coming, but the danger is unavoidable now because we sat by and allowed all this to happen."
Not so; even through the hollow eyes of death I spy life peering; but I dare not say How near the tidings of our comfort is.,"That’s not true. Even though we are close to ruin, I can see a way out. But I’m not going to say how near the news of our rescue is."
"Nay, let us share thy thoughts, as thou dost ours.","Please tell us your thoughts, as we have told you ours."
"Be confident to speak, Northumberland: We three are but thyself; and, speaking so, Thy words are but as thoughts; therefore, be bold.","Have the confidence to speak, Northumberland. The three of us are just like you. If you speak, you’ll most likely say what we’re already thinking. Be bold."
"Then thus: I have from Port le Blanc, a bay That Harry Duke of Hereford, Rainold Lord Cobham, That late broke from the Duke of Exeter, His brother, Archbishop late of Canterbury, Sir Thomas Erpingham, Sir John Ramston, All these well furnish’d by the Duke of Bretagne With eight tall ships, three thousand men of war, Are making hither with all due expedience And shortly mean to touch our northern shore: The first departing of the king for Ireland. If then we shall shake off our slavish yoke, Imp out our drooping country’s broken wing, Redeem from broking pawn the blemish’d crown, And make high majesty look like itself, Away with me in post to Ravenspurgh; But if you faint, as fearing to do so, Stay and be secret, and myself will go.","Then here it is: I have learned that the Duke of Bretagne, in Brittany, has given eight large ships to Harry Duke of Hereford as well as Rainold Lord Cobhman—who recently broke his alliance with the Duke of Exeter—his brother, the former Archbishop of Canterbury, Sir Thomas Erpingham, Sir John Ramston, Sir John Norbery, Sir Robert Waterton, and Francis Quoint. These men sailed the ships with three thousand soldiers from Port le Blanc, and right now they are racing to England. They left as soon as the king departed for Ireland. If you want to be free of your slavery to the king, help our country to rise again, and restore the honor of our royalty, then come with me right now to Ravenspurgh. If you’re afraid to do so, then wait here while I go myself."
"To horse, to horse! urge doubts to them that fear.",To our horses! Encourage anyone who is scared.
"Hold out my horse, and I will first be there.","If my horse holds up, I’ll be the first one there."
"Madam, your majesty is too much sad: You promised, when you parted with the king, To lay aside life-harming heaviness And entertain a cheerful disposition.","Madam, you are too sad. When we left the king, you promised to stop worrying so much and to try to act more cheerfully."
"I cannot do it; yet I know no cause Why I should welcome such a guest as grief, Save bidding farewell to so sweet a guest As my sweet Richard: yet again, methinks, Is coming towards me, and my inward soul With nothing trembles: at some thing it grieves, More than with parting from my lord the king.","I promised that to make the king happy, but for myself I cannot do it. I don’t know why I should be so sad, except that I had to say goodbye to my sweet Richard. But I also think that something bad is going to happen to me and I’m inwardly grieving. It’s making me more sad than the king’s leaving does."
"Each substance of a grief hath twenty shadows, For sorrow’s eye, glazed with blinding tears, Divides one thing entire to many objects; Like perspectives, which rightly gazed upon Show nothing but confusion, eyed awry Looking awry upon your lord’s departure, Find shapes of grief, more than himself, to wail; Which, look’d on as it is, is nought but shadows Of what it is not. Then, thrice-gracious queen, Or if it be, ’tis with false sorrow’s eye, Which for things true weeps things imaginary.","When you’re already sad it seems like everything is awful and your grief is multiplied. But, in reality, that’s not the case. Because you’re sad, things don’t appear to you as they actually are, so in your husband’s departure you see many things to grieve. Those are just shadows. So don’t cry for anything but your husband’s leaving. Any other causes of grief are just imaginary."
"It may be so; but yet my inward soul Persuades me it is otherwise: howe’er it be, As, though on thinking on no thought I think, Makes me with heavy nothing faint and shrink.","That may be true, but my instinct tells me otherwise. Whatever the case, I feel nothing but grief. In fact, I feel so sad that even when I’m not thinking about anything at all I feel woefully faint and weak."
"’Tis nothing but conceit, my gracious lady.","That’s nothing but your imagination, my queen."
"’Tis nothing le conceit is still derived For nothing had begot my something grief; Or something hath the nothing that I grieve: ’Tis in reversion that I do possess; But what it is, that is not yet known; what","Far from it. Imaginary feelings of grief are always the result of some real, prior grief. But that’s not my situation, as nothing has happened to me to cause my grief. My grief is reversed: I feel a grief whose cause I haven’t experienced yet. But I don’t know what that is. I can’t name it. All I know is that it’s a nameless sadness."
"God save your majesty! and well met, gentlemen: I hope the king is not yet shipp’d for Ireland.","God save the queen! And good to see you, too, gentlemen. I hope the king hasn’t left yet for Ireland."
"Why hopest thou so? ’tis better hope he is; For his designs crave haste, his haste good hope:","Why do you hope that? It’s better if he has since his plans require that he act quickly, so why do you hope he hasn’t sailed?"
"That he, our hope, might have retired his power, And driven into despair an enemy’s hope, Who strongly hath set footing in this land: The banish’d Bolingbroke repeals himself, At Ravenspurgh.","Our hope is that he might have brought his forces back from Ireland and caused our enemy, Bolingbroke, to give up. Even though he is exiled he has returned to England. He and a strong army have arrived safely to Ravenspurgh ready to fight."
Now God in heaven forbid!,"God, no!"
"Ah, madam, ’tis too true: and that is worse, The Lord Northumberland, his son young Henry Percy, With all their powerful friends, are fled to him.","Madam, it’s true, and what’s worse is that Lord Northumberland, his young son Henry Percy, the Lord of Ross, the Lord of Beaumond, and the Lord of Willoughby, along with their powerful friends, have all gone to join him."
Why have you not proclaim’d Northumberland And all the rest revolted faction traitors?,Why haven’t you proclaimed Northumberland and the others traitors?
We have: whereupon the Earl of Worcester And all the household servants fled with him To Bolingbroke.,"We did, and that’s when the Earl of Worcester broke his staff, resigned his job A staff is a rod of office and would have been carried by the Earl of Worcester, as the steward of the king’s household. staff, resigned his job , and, along with the king’s servants, fled to join Bolingbroke."
"So, Green, thou art the midwife to my woe, And Bolingbroke my sorrow’s dismal heir: And I, a gasping new-deliver’d mother, Have woe to woe, sorrow to sorrow join’d.","So, Green, you have helped me to give birth: I was pregnant with sorrow, Bolingbroke is the newborn child, and I am like a gasping mother who has just delivered her baby."
"Despair not, madam.","Madam, do not despair."
"Who shall hinder me? With cozening hope: he is a flatterer, A parasite, a keeper back of death, Who gently would dissolve the bands of life, Which false hope lingers in extremity.","Who’s going to stop me? I will despair, and I will not put up with any false hopes. False hope flatters and feeds on us, draws out our pain, and withholds death, which would be gentle otherwise."
Here comes the Duke of York.,Here comes the Duke of York.
"With signs of war about his aged neck: O, full of careful business are his looks! Uncle, for God’s sake, speak comfortable words.","His old neck shows signs of war. Oh, his face is full of anxiety! Uncle, for God’s sake, give us good news."
"Should I do so, I should belie my thoughts: Where nothing lives but crosses, cares and grief. Your husband, he is gone to save far off, Whilst others come to make him lose at home: Here am I left to underprop his land, Now comes the sick hour that his surfeit made; Now shall he try his friends that flatter’d him.","If I were to give you good news, I would be hiding my real thoughts. Good news is in heaven, and we are on earth, where nothing lives but trials, anxieties, and sorrow. Your husband has gone to protect his rule in Ireland, while others have come here to take it from him in England. Here I am, too old to support myself, left to prop up his country. The bad times that we thought his overindulgent ways would bring have arrived. Now his friends will be tested."
"My lord, your son was gone before I came.","My lord, your son was gone before I arrived."
"He was? Why, so! go all which way it will! And will, I fear, revolt on Hereford’s side. Sirrah, get thee to Plashy, to my sister Gloucester; Bid her send me presently a thousand pound: Hold, take my ring.","The nobles have fled, the commoners aren’t concerned, and they will likely fight on Hereford’s side. Sir, get thee to Plashy, to my sister-in-law Gloucester. Tell her to send me one thousand pounds right away. Wait, take my ring To prove the servant comes from the Duke of York. ring ."
"To-day, as I came by, I called there; But I shall grieve you to report the rest.","My lord, I forgot to tell you, I went by her house today. But it will upset you if I tell you the rest."
"What is’t, knave?","What is it, boy?"
"An hour before I came, the duchess died.","An hour before I got there, your sister-in-law died."
"Comes rushing on this woeful land at once! I know not what to do: I would to God, So my untruth had not provoked him to it, The king had cut off my head with my brother’s. How shall we do for money for these wars? Come, sister,—cousin, I would say—pray, pardon me. Go, fellow, get thee home, provide some carts And bring away the armour that is there.","God have mercy! What a tide of troubles comes rushing over this land all at once! I don’t know what to do. I wish to God that the king had cut off my head when he cut off my brother’s. Has no one sent any messengers to Ireland yet? How are we going to pay for these wars? Come, sister—or I should say, cousin. Excuse me. (to the servant) Go home, fellow, and find some carts and bring the armor that’s there."
"If I know how or which way to order these affairs Thus thrust disorderly into my hands, Never believe me. Both are my kinsmen: The one is my sovereign, whom both my oath Is my kinsman, whom the king hath wrong’d, Whom conscience and my kindred bids to right. Well, somewhat we must do. Come, cousin, I’ll Dispose of you. And meet me presently at Berkeley. I should to Plashy too; But time will not permit: all is uneven, And every thing is left at six and seven.","Gentlemen, will you go round up some men? I don’t know what I should do now. Both Richard and Bolingbroke are my kinsmen. One is my king, to whom I’ve pledged allegiance and have a duty to defend. The other is my kinsman, whom the king has mistreated. My conscience and my family bonds tell me to right those wrongs. Well, we’ve got to do something. (to the queen) Come, cousin, I’ll make arrangements for you. Gentlemen, go and round up some men and meet me at Berkeley Castle. I should go to Plashy, too, but there isn’t enough time. Everything is in chaos."
But none returns. For us to levy power Proportionable to the enemy Is all unpossible.,"The message has probably reached Ireland, but no news has come back yet. It’s impossible for us to find enough soldiers to match the enemy’s force."
"Besides, our nearness to the king in love","Besides, our closeness to the king means we are hated by those who hate the king."
"And that’s the wavering commons: for their love Lies in their purses, and whoso empties them By so much fills their hearts with deadly hate.","And that’s how the common folk must be. Their love depends on who gives them money, and they hate those who take their money away."
Wherein the king stands generally condemn’d.,That’s why almost all the common folk hate the king.
Because we ever have been near the king.,"If they’re to be the judges, then our fate is in their hands, because we’ve always been on the side of the king."
"Well, I will for refuge straight to Bristol castle: The Earl of Wiltshire is already there.","Well, I’m going straight to Bristol Castle to take refuge. The Earl of Wiltshire is already there."
Thither will I with you; for little office Except like curs to tear us all to pieces. Will you go along with us?,I’ll go with you. The hateful common folk won’t help us at all but will act like dogs and tear us to pieces. Will you come with us?
"No; I will to Ireland to his majesty. Farewell: if heart’s presages be not vain,","No. I’ll go to the king in Ireland. Goodbye. If my instinct is correct, the three of us here will never meet again."
That’s as York thrives to beat back Bolingbroke.,That depends on whether York can defeat Bolingbroke.
"Alas, poor duke! the task he undertakes Is numbering sands and drinking oceans dry: Where one on his side fights, thousands will fly.","Oh, poor duke! The task he must begin is as hard as counting the sand in a desert or drinking all the water in the ocean. For every person who fights with him, there will be thousands who will not. Goodbye immediately and forever."
"Well, we may meet again.","Well, we might meet again."
"I fear me, never.",I fear that we won’t.
"How far is it, my lord, to Berkeley now?","How much farther is it to Berkeley, my lord?"
"Believe me, noble lord, I am a stranger here in Gloucestershire: These high wild hills and rough uneven ways And yet your fair discourse hath been as sugar, Making the hard way sweet and delectable. But I bethink me what a weary way From Ravenspurgh to Cotswold will be found Which, I protest, hath very much beguiled The tediousness and process of my travel: But theirs is sweetened with the hope to have The present benefit which I possess; Than hope enjoy’d: by this the weary lords Shall make their way seem short, as mine hath done By sight of what I have, your noble company.","Believe me, my noble lord, I’m a stranger to these parts. These high and wild hills go on for miles and are tiring. And yet your good conversation has been like sugar, making the difficult journey sweeter. But I think it will be a long and hard journey from Ravenspurgh to Cotswold for Ross and Willoughby since they won’t have your company, which has made my trip easier. But their trip will be made more enjoyable by the expectation that you’ll go with them next time. In this way, the journey for those tired lords will seem shorter. That’s what has happened to me. My journey has seemed shorter because you’ve been with me."
Of much less value is my company,My companionship isn’t nearly as valuable as your kind words. Who’s coming?
"It is my son, young Harry Percy, Sent from my brother Worcester, whencesoever. Harry, how fares your uncle?","It’s my son, young Harry Percy. He was sent by my brother Worcester, wherever he may be. Harry, how is your uncle Worcester?"
"I had thought, my lord, to have learn’d his health of you.","I was thinking, my lord, that you would tell me that."
"Why, is he not with the queen?",Is he not with the queen?
"No, my good Lord; he hath forsook the court, Broken his staff of office and dispersed The household of the king.","No, my good lord. He has abandoned the court. He broke his staff and let the king’s servants go."
What was his reason?,What was his reason? The last time we were together he hadn’t decided to do that.
"Because your lordship was proclaimed traitor. But he, my lord, is gone to Ravenspurgh, To offer service to the Duke of Hereford, And sent me over by Berkeley, to discover Then with directions to repair to Ravenspurgh.","He did it because you were proclaimed a traitor. But, my lord, he’s gone now to Ravenspurgh, to help the Duke of Hereford, and he sent me to Berkeley to discover how large an army the Duke of York had there. Then he gave me orders to go on to Ravenspurgh."
"Have you forgot the Duke of Hereford, boy?","Have you forgotten who the Duke of Hereford is, boy?"
"No, my good lord, for that is not forgot Which ne’er I did remember: to my knowledge,","No, my good lord, because I can’t forget something I never remembered. I don’t think I’ve ever seen him in my life."
Then learn to know him now; this is the duke.,Then meet him now. This is the duke.
"My gracious lord, I tender you my service, Such as it is, being tender, raw and young: Which elder days shall ripen and confirm","My gracious lord, I am in your service. I am young, but as I get older, I will demonstrate more impressive abilities."
"I thank thee, gentle Percy; and be sure I count myself in nothing else so happy As in a soul remembering my good friends; And, as my fortune ripens with thy love, My heart this covenant makes, my hand thus seals it.","Thank you, kind Percy. I count myself happiest when remembering my good friends. I know that the reward for your love will be to witness how it helps me find greater success. My heart makes this promise to you, and this handshake seals that promise."
How far is it to Berkeley? and what stir Keeps good old York there with his men of war?,How far is it to Berkeley? And what events keep good old York there with his soldiers?
"There stands the castle, by yon tuft of trees, And in it are the Lords of York, Berkeley, and Seymour; None else of name and noble estimate.","There’s the castle, over by that group of trees. I’ve heard that it’s protected by three hundred men, and that the Lord of York, the Lord of Berkeley, and the Lord of Seymour are there. There’s no one else of title and noble reputation inside."
"Here come the Lords of Ross and Willoughby, Bloody with spurring, fiery-red with haste.","Here come the Lord of Ross and the Lord of Willoughby. They are bloody from sticking their spurs so hard into their horses, and their faces are red from riding here so fast."
"A banish’d traitor: all my treasury Is yet but unfelt thanks, which more enrich’d Shall be your love and labour’s recompense.","Welcome, my lords. I know that you’ve followed me here out of love for me. Right now I can only pay you with my thanks, but once I have money I’ll repay your love and hard work."
"Your presence makes us rich, most noble lord.","We are rich enough from just being here with you here, most noble lord."
And far surmounts our labour to attain it.,And that richness is much more than anything we could earn by working.
"Evermore thanks, the exchequer of the poor; Which, till my infant fortune comes to years, Stands for my bounty. But who comes here?","The poor earn their wealth in the form of gratitude. Until my young fortune matures, that gratitude will have to take the place of riches. But who’s coming now?"
"It is my Lord of Berkeley, as I guess.",I think it’s the Lord of Berkeley.
"My Lord of Hereford, my message is to you.","Lord of Hereford, I have a message for you."
"My lord, my answer is—to Lancaster; And I am come to seek that name in England; And I must find that title in your tongue, Before I make reply to aught you say.","My lord, I will answer only to my proper name, the Duke of Lancaster. And I have come to claim that name here in England. I must hear you call me that title before I respond to anything else you say."
"To raze one title of your honour out: To you, my lord, I come, what lord you will, From the most gracious regent of this land, The Duke of York, to know what pricks you on And fright our native peace with self-born arms.","Don’t misunderstand, my lord. It’s not my intention to deny you your title. I’ve come to you, my lord—whatever title you want me to use—from the most gracious regent in this land, that is the Duke of York. I need to know what has led you to exploit the absence of our king and jeopardize the peace in this land with your armies."
I shall not need transport my words by you; Here comes his grace in person. My noble uncle!,(to Lord Berkeley) I won’t have to pass my message through you. Here comes his grace in person. (to the Duke of York) My noble uncle!
"Show me thy humble heart, and not thy knee,",I don’t want to see you kneeling. I know you don’t really honor me.
My gracious uncle—,My gracious uncle—
"Tut, tut! Grace me no grace, nor uncle me no uncle: I am no traitor’s uncle; and that word ‘grace.’ Why have those banish’d and forbidden legs Dared once to touch a dust of England’s ground? But then more ‘why?’ why have they dared to march So many miles upon her peaceful bosom, And ostentation of despised arms? Comest thou because the anointed king is hence? Why, foolish boy, the king is left behind, And in my loyal bosom lies his power. As when brave Gaunt, thy father, and myself Rescued the Black Prince, that young Mars of men, From forth the ranks of many thousand French, O, then how quickly should this arm of mine. And minister correction to thy fault!","Tsk, tsk! Don’t call me grace, and don’t call me uncle. I am not the uncle of a traitor, and it’s obscene to use that word “grace” when everybody knows you’re ungracious. You were banished, so why have you come back to England? Why have you and your army marched miles across peaceful England, scaring villagers with threats of war and displays of hateful weapons? Have you come now because the king is away? Why, you foolish boy, don’t you know that the king has put me in charge while he’s away and that I am loyal to him? If I were still the strong young man who, with your father, John of Gaunt, rescued the king’s father from thousands of French soldiers, I would quickly smack you. But my arm is too weak and shaky to administer punishment in that way."
"My gracious uncle, let me know my fault: On what condition stands it and wherein?","My gracious uncle, why don’t you tell me exactly what I’ve done wrong?"
"Even in condition of the worst degree, Thou art a banish’d man, and here art come Before the expiration of thy time, In braving arms against thy sovereign.",You’ve done the worst that you can: rebellion and treason. You are banished from this country and now you’ve returned before you are allowed to do so. And you’ve brought an army to fight against your king.
"As I was banish’d, I was banish’d Hereford; And, noble uncle, I beseech your grace Look on my wrongs with an indifferent eye: You are my father, for methinks in you I see old Gaunt alive; O, then, my father, A wandering vagabond; my rights and royalties Pluck’d from my arms perforce and given away To upstart unthrifts? Wherefore was I born? If that my cousin king be King of England, You have a son, Aumerle, my noble cousin; Had you first died, and he been thus trod down, He should have found his uncle Gaunt a father, To rouse his wrongs and chase them to the bay. And yet my letters-patents give me leave: My father’s goods are all distrain’d and sold, And these and all are all amiss employ’d. What would you have me do? I am a subject, And therefore, personally I lay my claim To my inheritance of free descent.","I was banished as Hereford, but I return as Lancaster. And, noble uncle, I beg that you look at my missteps impartially. I think I see my father in you. Oh, then, my father, are you going to force me to be a wandering drifter forever, while what is rightfully mine is taken away by force and given to wasteful social climbers? Why was I born? If my cousin is allowed to be the King of England, then I must be allowed to be the Duke of Lancaster. You have a son, Aumerle, who is my noble cousin. Let’s say that you died, and he had been treated this way. His uncle Gaunt would have acted as a father to him and fought to correct the wrongs done against him. I’m not allowed to claim my inheritance, though I’m legally entitled to do so. My father’s possessions have all been wrongfully confiscated and sold. What do you think I should do? I am a subject of the King of England, aren’t I? I claim what is lawfully mine. Since I’m not allowed to have attorneys, I must claim my inheritance myself."
The noble duke hath been too much abused.,The noble duke has been abused very much.
It stands your grace upon to do him right.,You owe it to him to treat him well.
Base men by his endowments are made great.,His money and property are making lowly men rich.
"My lords of England, let me tell you this: I have had feeling of my cousin’s wrongs And laboured all I could to do him right; But in this kind to come, in braving arms, To find out right with wrong, it may not be; And you that do abet him in this kind Cherish rebellion and are rebels all.","Listen, lords of England: I’ve known about the injustices done to my cousin, and I have done everything I could to correct them. But because of the way he’s returned to England, with an army and all these weapons, there’s nothing I can do. And you who are helping him are just lowly rebels."
The noble duke hath sworn his coming is We all have strongly sworn to give him aid; And let him ne’er see joy that breaks that oath!,"The noble duke has sworn he has come back to England only for his own sake and not for any other reason. We have all sworn to help him, and I hope anyone who breaks that promise never feels joy again."
"Well, well, I see the issue of these arms: I cannot mend it, I must needs confess, But if I could, by Him that gave me life, I would attach you all and make you stoop Unto the sovereign mercy of the king; But since I cannot, be it known to you Unless you please to enter in the castle And there repose you for this night.","Well, well, I see how this is going to go. I admit I can’t change it, because my army is weak. But if God would let me, I’d arrest you all and make you stoop down before our king. But since I can’t, I’m going to remain neutral. So, good luck to you. Or do you want to come sleep in the castle tonight?"
"An offer, uncle, that we will accept: But we must win your grace to go with us By Bushy, Bagot and their complices, The caterpillars of the commonwealth, Which I have sworn to weed and pluck away.","Yes, uncle, we do. But first we must convince you to go with us to Bristol Castle, which I’ve heard is being held by Bushy, Bagot, and their accomplices. They are devouring the kingdom like caterpillars, and I’ve sworn to eliminate them."
"It may be I will go with you: but yet I’ll pause; Nor friends nor foes, to me welcome you are: Things past redress are now with me past care.","I might go with you, but let me think about it first. I hate to break our country’s laws. I look at you neither as a friend nor a foe, and I don’t care about people’s past misdeeds that can’t be fixed now."
"My lord of Salisbury, we have stay’d ten days, And hardly kept our countrymen together, And yet we hear no tidings from the king; Therefore we will disperse ourselves: farewell.","My lord of Salisbury, we’ve waited here for ten days and have had difficulty keeping our countrymen together. Since we’ve heard nothing from the king, we’re going to leave. Goodbye."
The king reposeth all his confidence in thee.,"My trusty Welshman, please stay one more day. The king has placed all his confidence in you."
"’Tis thought the king is dead; we will not stay. The bay-trees in our country are all wither’d And meteors fright the fixed stars of heaven; And lean-look’d prophets whisper fearful change; Rich men look sad and ruffians dance and leap, The one in fear to lose what they enjoy, The other to enjoy by rage and war: Farewell: our countrymen are gone and fled, As well assured Richard their king is dead.","It’s believed that the king is dead, and we’re not going to stay. The trees in our country are all withered, and there are meteors flashing in the sky and scaring the stars. The moon has turned red, and the fortunetellers say that bad things are going to happen. Rich men suddenly look sad because they’re afraid they’re going to lose their possessions. And criminals are dancing because they know they’re going to steal those possessions violently. All of these signs point to the death, or at least the fall, of kings. Goodbye. My countrymen have already fled, as they know that King Richard II is dead."
"Ah, Richard, with the eyes of heavy mind I see thy glory like a shooting star Thy sun sets weeping in the lowly west, Witnessing storms to come, woe and unrest: Thy friends are fled to wait upon thy foes, And crossly to thy good all fortune goes.","Ah, Richard, I can see that your glory, like a shooting star, is falling from the sky to the ground, and the thought is weighing heavily on my mind. Your sun is setting in the west and it’s crying, which tells me that storms of grief and chaos are coming. All of your friends have left you and pledged allegiance to your enemies, and fortune works against you."
"Bring forth these men. Bushy and Green, I will not vex your souls— Since presently your souls must part your bodies— With too much urging your pernicious lives, From off my hands, here in the view of men I will unfold some causes of your deaths. You have misled a prince, a royal king, A happy gentleman in blood and lineaments, You have in manner with your sinful hours Made a divorce betwixt his queen and him, Broke the possession of a royal bed And stain’d the beauty of a fair queen’s cheeks Myself, a prince by fortune of my birth, Near to the king in blood, and near in love Till you did make him misinterpret me, Have stoop’d my neck under your injuries, Eating the bitter bread of banishment; Whilst you have fed upon my signories, Dispark’d my parks and fell’d my forest woods, From my own windows torn my household coat, Save men’s opinions and my living blood, To show the world I am a gentleman. This and much more, much more than twice all this, Condemns you to the death. See them deliver’d over","Bring these men to me. Bushy and Green, I won’t torment your souls with too much talk of your wicked lives since your souls will soon leave your bodies. But so no one may claim your execution was murder, I will explain with these men as witnesses why you are legally sentenced to death. You have deceived a king, a man who was happy and attractive until you came along and changed him. Through your evil ways, you have driven a wedge between the king and the queen. You’ve interfered with their happy marriage and caused the queen suffering. I, by the luck of my birth, am a prince. I am closely related to the king, and until you changed his feelings toward me, he loved me. Because of your actions, I’ve had to live in exile in a foreign country, and meanwhile you lived off my wealth and property here, leasing my hunting grounds to others and cutting down my forests. You tore my family’s coat of arms out of the windows of my house and destroyed all signs of my family’s existence. If not for men’s opinions and the fact that I’m still alive, no one would ever know that the property was mine and that I am a member of the nobility. These crimes and at least twice as many more condemn you to death."
To execution and the hand of death.,Make sure they are executed soon.
"More welcome is the stroke of death to me Than Bolingbroke to England. Lords, farewell.","I welcome death more than England welcomes the return of Bolingbroke. Lords, goodbye."
My comfort is that heaven will take our souls And plague injustice with the pains of hell.,"I am comforted knowing that our souls will go to heaven and that heaven will give hell to Bolingbroke, who committed this injustice."
"My Lord Northumberland, see them dispatch’d.","My lord Northumberland, see that they are killed."
"Uncle, you say the queen is at your house; For God’s sake, fairly let her be entreated: Tell her I send to her my kind commends; Take special care my greetings be deliver’d.","Uncle, you said that the queen is at your house. For God’s sake, let her be treated courteously. Give her my best, and make sure to deliver my greeting."
With letters of your love to her at large.,I’ve sent a gentleman to her with the message.
"Thank, gentle uncle. Come, lords, away. To fight with Glendower and his complices: Awhile to work, and after holiday.","Thanks, kind uncle. Come, lords, let’s leave. We’ve got to fight Glendower and his accomplices. First, we’ll work, and then we’ll be able to rest."
Barkloughly castle call they this at hand?,Do they call this castle Barkloughly castle?
"Yea, my lord. How brooks your grace the air, After your late tossing on the breaking seas?","Yes, my lord. How do you like it here, after you’ve been tossing about on the open seas?"
"Needs must I like it well: I weep for joy Dear earth, I do salute thee with my hand, Though rebels wound thee with their horses’ hoofs: As a long-parted mother with her child Plays fondly with her tears and smiles in meeting, And do thee favours with my royal hands. Feed not thy sovereign’s foe, my gentle earth, Nor with thy sweets comfort his ravenous sense; But let thy spiders, that suck up thy venom, Doing annoyance to the treacherous feet Which with usurping steps do trample thee: Yield stinging nettles to mine enemies; And when they from thy bosom pluck a flower, Whose double tongue may with a mortal touch Throw death upon thy sovereign’s enemies. Mock not my senseless conjuration, lords: This earth shall have a feeling and these stones Shall falter under foul rebellion’s arms.","Of course I like it here. Standing here on my kingdom again makes me cry with joy. Dear earth, I salute you, even though insurgents are wounding you by riding their horses over you. Like a mother who has been away from her child for a long time, I cry and smile and greet you. Please, gentle earth, provide no nourishment or shelter for my enemies. Instead, let your venomous spiders and your toads get in their way. Put stinging nettles A plant with jagged leaves covered with hairs that sting. nettles in their path. And when they pick a flower from the ground, let a poisonous snake bite and kill them. Lords, don’t make fun of me for asking this. The earth will have feelings, and these stones will turn into armed soldiers, before I, England’s legitimate king, let these terrible rebels defeat us."
"Fear not, my lord: that Power that made you king Hath power to keep you king in spite of all. The means that heaven yields must be embraced, And we will not, heaven’s offer we refuse, The proffer’d means of succor and redress.","Don’t worry, my lord, the power that made you king is the same power that will keep you king in spite of all these troubles. We must embrace the opportunities that God gives us and not neglect them. Otherwise, we’re rejecting both God’s protection from these problems as well as his solution for them."
"He means, my lord, that we are too remiss; Whilst Bolingbroke, through our security,","What he means, my lord, is that we’re being neglectful because of overconfidence, while Bolingbroke is growing stronger."
"Discomfortable cousin! know’st thou not That when the searching eye of heaven is hid, Behind the globe, that lights the lower world, Then thieves and robbers range abroad unseen But when from under this terrestrial ball He fires the proud tops of the eastern pines And darts his light through every guilty hole, Then murders, treasons and detested sins, Stand bare and naked, trembling at themselves? So when this thief, this traitor, Bolingbroke, Who all this while hath revell’d in the night Whilst we were wandering with the antipodes, His treasons will sit blushing in his face, Not able to endure the sight of day, But self-affrighted tremble at his sin. Not all the water in the rough rude sea The breath of worldly men cannot depose The deputy elected by the Lord: For every man that Bolingbroke hath press’d To lift shrewd steel against our golden crown, A glorious angel: then, if angels fight, Weak men must fall, for heaven still guards the right.","You are so discouraging, cousin! Don’t you know that at nighttime, when the sun has set, thieves roam the earth unseen, boldly committing murder and other crimes? But when the sun comes up and lights the treetops and every dark hole, then those same criminals stand trembling with no way to hide. So when this thief, this traitor Bolingbroke, who has been committing all these crimes during the nighttime, sees us coming up with the sun, he’ll be ashamed and will tremble at the light of day. All the water in an ocean can’t wash away a king’s right to the throne. Mere mortals can’t get rid of someone who has been appointed by God. For every solider Bolingbroke has enlisted to fight against me, God has given me an angel. And when angels fight, the weak men fall, since heaven always guards those who are right."
"Welcome, my lord how far off lies your power?","Welcome, my lord. How far away is your army?"
"Nor near nor farther off, my gracious lord, And bids me speak of nothing but despair. One day too late, I fear me, noble lord, Hath clouded all thy happy days on earth: O, call back yesterday, bid time return, To-day, to-day, unhappy day, too late, O’erthrows thy joys, friends, fortune and thy state: For all the Welshmen, hearing thou wert dead. Are gone to Bolingbroke, dispersed and fled.","My army consists only of me, and I am too upset to talk of anything but despair. We are one day too late and have lost our chance of seeing happy times again. Oh, I wish it were still yesterday. If we could go back in time, we’d have twelve thousand men ready to fight on our side! Today, today—it is an unhappy day. Today has taken away any chance for joy, friends, wealth, and power. All the Welshmen heard that you were dead, and they’ve all joined Bolingbroke’s army."
"Comfort, my liege; why looks your grace so pale?","Cheer up, my lord. Why are you so pale?"
"But now the blood of twenty thousand men Did triumph in my face, and they are fled; And, till so much blood thither come again, Have I not reason to look pale and dead? For time hath set a blot upon my pride.","Only a moment ago, I had twenty thousand men fighting for me, and now they’ve all fled. Until they return, aren’t I allowed to look as pale as if I were dead? Anyone who wants to be safe flees from me, as recent events have tarnished my reputation."
"Comfort, my liege; remember who you are.","Cheer up, my lord. Don’t forget that you’re the king."
"I had forgot myself; am I not king? Awake, thou coward majesty! thou sleepest. Arm, arm, my name! a puny subject strikes At thy great glory. Look not to the ground, Ye favourites of a king: are we not high? High be our thoughts: I know my uncle York","I forgot. I’m the king, aren’t I? Awake, you cowardly king. You’re sleeping. Isn’t being the king worth as much as twenty thousand men? Prepare for action, my name! A young and weak subject is trying to damage your glory. Don’t hang your head low. You favorite men of the king—aren’t we high above them all? Then we should aim high as well: I know my uncle York has enough troops for our needs. But who’s coming now?"
More health and happiness betide my liege Than can my care-tuned tongue deliver him!,"I hope more health and happiness come to you, my lord, than my grief-stricken tongue can offer."
"Mine ear is open and my heart prepared; The worst is worldly loss thou canst unfold. And what loss is it to be rid of care? Strives Bolingbroke to be as great as we? Greater he shall not be; if he serve God, We’ll serve Him too and be his fellow so: They break their faith to God as well as us: Cry woe, destruction, ruin and decay: The worst is death, and death will have his day.","My ears are open, and my heart is ready. The worst you can tell me about are losses for me here on earth. So, did I lose my kingdom? It was my problem, and what loss is it to be rid of a problem? Is Bolingbroke still trying to overthrow me? If he serves God, we will serve God, too, and then the two of us will be merely equals. Are our subjects revolting? We can’t fix that. They break their faith with God as well as with us. Though you may cry out about woe, destruction, ruin, and decay, death is the worst fate of all, and the time for death will come."
"Glad am I that your highness is so arm’d Like an unseasonable stormy day, Which makes the silver rivers drown their shores, As if the world were all dissolved to tears, So high above his limits swells the rage With hard bright steel and hearts harder than steel. White-beards have arm’d their thin and hairless scalps Against thy majesty; boys, with women’s voices, Strive to speak big and clap their female joints The very beadsmen learn to bend their bows Of double-fatal yew against thy state; Yea, distaff-women manage rusty bills Against thy seat: both young and old rebel,","I’m glad that your highness is prepared for the worst. Bolingbroke is bursting with rage and his army is attacking all across England. It’s like an unexpected flood that makes it seem like the world is crying. Even old men with white beards have joined forces against your majesty, and young boys who still speak in high-pitched voices. The men whom we paid to pray for us are also now on their side, and women are fighting against you as well. Everything is going far worse for you than I can possibly describe."
"Too well, too well thou tell’st a tale so ill. Where is the Earl of Wiltshire? where is Bagot? What is become of Bushy? where is Green? That they have let the dangerous enemy If we prevail, their heads shall pay for it: I warrant they have made peace with Bolingbroke.","You are describing these horrible things too vividly. Where is the Earl of Wiltshire? Where is Bagot? What happened to Bushy? Where is Green? They didn’t let the dangerous enemy cross over our territories without any opposition, did they? If we win, they’ll pay for their failures with their heads. I’ll bet they’ve made peace with Bolingbroke."
"Peace have they made with him indeed, my lord.","Oh, yes, they’ve made peace, my lord."
"O villains, vipers, damn’d without redemption! Snakes, in my heart-blood warm’d, that sting my heart! Three Judases, each one thrice worse than Judas! Would they make peace? terrible hell make war Upon their spotted souls for this offence!","Oh, they are villains and vipers, damned without any hope for redemption! They’re like dogs that will suck up to anyone! They’re three Judases The disciple who betrayed Christ to Jewish authorities in return for thirty pieces of silver. Judases , but each three times worse than Judas! I hope their guilt-stained souls are punished terribly for what they’ve done!"
"Turns to the sourest and most deadly hate: Again uncurse their souls; their peace is made With heads, and not with hands; those whom you curse Have felt the worst of death’s destroying wound","I see how your love turns into the deadliest of hatred. Please, take back your curses. Their peace wasn’t made by joining forces with Bolingbroke. It was made with God, when they were executed. They are all in their graves now."
"Is Bushy, Green, and the Earl of Wiltshire dead?","Are Bushy, Green, and the Earl of Wiltshire dead?"
"Ay, all of them at Bristol lost their heads.","Yes, they were all beheaded at Bristol."
Where is the duke my father with his power?,Where is my father with his army?
"No matter where; of comfort no man speak: Make dust our paper and with rainy eyes Write sorrow on the bosom of the earth, Let’s choose executors and talk of wills: And yet not so, for what can we bequeath Our lands, our lives and all are Bolingbroke’s, And nothing can we call our own but death And that small model of the barren earth Which serves as paste and cover to our bones. And tell sad stories of the death of kings; How some have been deposed; some slain in war, Some haunted by the ghosts they have deposed; Some poison’d by their wives: some sleeping kill’d; That rounds the mortal temples of a king Keeps Death his court and there the antic sits, Scoffing his state and grinning at his pomp, Allowing him a breath, a little scene, Infusing him with self and vain conceit, As if this flesh which walls about our life, Were brass impregnable, and humour’d thus Comes at the last and with a little pin Cover your heads and mock not flesh and blood With solemn reverence: throw away respect, Tradition, form and ceremonious duty, For you have but mistook me all this while: Taste grief, need friends: subjected thus, How can you say to me, I am a king?","It doesn’t matter where he is. Let’s not try to cheer ourselves up. We must talk about graves and worms and epitaphs An inscription on a tombstone. epitaphs . We’ll make the dust our paper and use our tears to write a message of sorrow on the earth. Let’s choose our executors A person appointed by another to carry out the terms of his or her will. executors and talk of wills. And, yet, what can we bequeath to anyone other than leaving our rotting bodies to the ground? Our lands and our lives now belong to Bolingbroke, and we can call nothing our own except for our deaths and that little patch of earth that will cover our buried bodies. For God’s sake, let’s sit on the ground and tell sad stories of the death of kings, how some were overthrown and others killed in war. Some were haunted by the ghosts of the kings they had overthrown. Still others were poisoned by their wives, while others were killed in their sleep. All of them, however, were murdered. There is always death around kings, and there’s no way to escape it. Death laughs at the king’s reign and mocks his great ceremonies, allowing him to live a little while and play the monarch. Death fills him with pride as if the king’s body were immortal, and at the end death comes and with little effort kills the body. Then goodbye, king! So stop treating me so respectfully. There’s no need to pretend that I am any different than you. You’ve been wrong about me all this time. I feel all the same things that you do. I have desires and feel sad and need friends, just like you. How, then, can you say that I’m a king?"
"My lord, wise men ne’er sit and wail their woes, But presently prevent the ways to wail. Gives in your weakness strength unto your foe, And so your follies fight against yourself. Fear and be slain; no worse can come to fight: And fight and die is death destroying death;","My lord, wise men never sit and feel sorry for themselves but try to fix the causes of their sorrow. Since fear weakens you, fearing your enemy only works against you and helps your enemy. If you’re scared, you’ll die. That’s the worst that can happen in battle. But fighting and dying is a way of beating death, because then you die nobly. But being scared and dying gives death the victory."
My father hath a power; inquire of him And learn to make a body of a limb.,My father has soldiers. Let’s figure out where he is and make an army out of the men he has.
"Thou chidest me well: proud Bolingbroke, I come To change blows with thee for our day of doom. An easy task it is to win our own. Say, Scroop, where lies our uncle with his power? Speak sweetly, man, although thy looks be sour.","Your scolding does me good. Proud Bolingbroke, I’ll exchange blows with you on our day of destiny. My fit of fear has passed. It should be easy to get our men together. Scroop, where is my uncle with his men? Tell me good news, man, even though you look bad."
"Men judge by the complexion of the sky So may you by my dull and heavy eye, My tongue hath but a heavier tale to say. I play the torturer, by small and small To lengthen out the worst that must be spoken: And all your northern castles yielded up, And all your southern gentlemen in arms Upon his party.","Men often determine what the day is going to be like by looking at the sky, so you should know by my dull and gloomy eyes that I’m about to deliver bad news. I’m acting like a torturer, drawing out the pain of what I have to say. Your uncle York has joined forces with Bolingbroke. They have possession of all your northern castles now, and all your men of rank in the south are fighting for them, too."
Thou hast said enough.,You have said enough.
"Of that sweet way I was in to despair! What say you now? what comfort have we now? By heaven, I’ll hate him everlastingly That bids me be of comfort any more. A king, woe’s slave, shall kingly woe obey. That power I have, discharge; and let them go To ear the land that hath some hope to grow, For I have none: let no man speak again","I curse you, cousin, for convincing me not to be sad anymore. What do you have to say now? What comforts us now? I swear to God, I will forever hate the man who tells me not to despair now. Go to Flint Castle. That’s where I will wait. I am a king, but I am a slave of sorrow, and I will follow sorrow’s orders. Tell my army that they may leave and go work for some cause that has hope, since I have none. I don’t want to hear anyone trying to change my mind. Any advice is pointless."
"My liege, one word.","My lord, may I have a word."
"He does me double wrong That wounds me with the flatteries of his tongue. Discharge my followers: let them hence away,",The person who tries to convince me again not to despair will become the second person to treat me poorly. Let my army go. England will be Bolingbroke’s very soon.
"So that by this intelligence we learn The Welshmen are dispersed, and Salisbury Is gone to meet the king, who lately landed With some few private friends upon this coast.","So we know from this latest news that the Welshmen have left the battlefield and that the king has landed with some of his friends on the coast, where Salisbury has gone to meet him."
Richard not far from hence hath hid his head.,"It’s good news, my lord. Richard is hiding not very far from here."
It would beseem the Lord Northumberland To say ‘King Richard:’ alack the heavy day When such a sacred king should hide his head.,It would be better for Lord Northumberland to call him “King Richard.” We should mourn the day that a king has to hide.
Left I his title out.,Your grace misunderstands me. I only left off his title for the sake of brevity.
"The time hath been, Would you have been so brief with him, he would Have been so brief with you, to shorten you,","There was a time when, if you’d been so brief in his presence, he would have made you even briefer, by chopping off your head."
"Mistake not, uncle, further than you should.","Uncle, don’t take this misunderstanding too far."
"Take not, good cousin, further than you should. Lest you mistake the heavens are o’er our heads.","Good cousin, don’t take more than you should, or you may forget heaven rules over us."
"I know it, uncle, and oppose not myself","I know it, uncle, and won’t oppose the will of heaven. But who is coming?"
"Welcome, Harry: what, will not this castle yield?","Welcome, Harry. What, won’t this castle give in?"
"The castle royally is mann’d, my lord, Against thy entrance.","The castle is guarded by royal soldiers, my lord, and they won’t let you enter."
Royally!,"Royal! But there’s no king here, is there?"
"Yes, my good lord, It doth contain a king; King Richard lies Within the limits of yon lime and stone: And with him are the Lord Aumerle, Lord Salisbury, Of holy reverence; who, I cannot learn.","Yes, my lord, there is a king here. King Richard is inside, along with Lord Aumerle, Lord Salisbury, Sir Stephen Scroop, as well a holy clergyman whom I don’t know."
"O, belike it is the Bishop of Carlisle.",It’s probably the Bishop of Carlisle.
"Noble lords, Go to the rude ribs of that ancient castle; Into his ruin’d ears, and thus deliver: Henry Bolingbroke On both his knees doth kiss King Richard’s hand And sends allegiance and true faith of heart Even at his feet to lay my arms and power, Provided that my banishment repeal’d And lands restored again be freely granted: If not, I’ll use the advantage of my power Rain’d from the wounds of slaughter’d Englishmen: The which, how far off from the mind of Bolingbroke It is, such crimson tempest should bedrench The fresh green lap of fair King Richard’s land, Go, signify as much, while here we march Upon the grassy carpet of this plain. Let’s march without the noise of threatening drum, That from this castle’s tatter’d battlements Methinks King Richard and myself should meet With no less terror than the elements Of fire and water, when their thundering shock At meeting tears the cloudy cheeks of heaven. The rage be his, whilst on the earth I rain My waters; on the earth, and not on him. March on, and mark King Richard how he looks.","Noble lords, approach the crude walls of this old castle and let the trumpets sound a signal to the king that we want to meet. Deliver this message: Henry Bolingbroke kneels before King Richard, kisses his hand, and offers his loyalty and true faith of heart. I come to lay my weapons and my power at his feet, as long as he repeals my banishment and freely gives back all my lands. If he won’t, I’ll use my power to rain his Englishmen’s blood on the summer’s dust. By kneeling submissively before him I’ll show how little I desire to drench his green lands in this way. Go, tell him, and meanwhile we’ll march here on the plain. Let’s march without the drums so that they can clearly see our excellent military equipment from the castle’s ruined roof. I think King Richard and I should meet in the same way that lightning and rain mix in the sky, producing thunder that rips it apart. If he’s the lightning, I’ll be the rain. He can rage, while I will yield and pour my waters on the earth. But only on the earth, not on him. March along, and notice how King Richard looks."
"See, see, King Richard doth himself appear, From out the fiery portal of the east, When he perceives the envious clouds are bent To dim his glory and to stain the track Of his bright passage to the occident.","See, King Richard himself appears, just as the sun rises unhappily in the east when it sees the clouds covering the sky and trying to hide his rays."
"As bright as is the eagle’s, lightens forth Controlling majesty: alack, alack, for woe, That any harm should stain so fair a show!","He still looks like a king. Look, his eye is as bright as an eagle’s and commands authority. It would be a shame to harm his fair appearance!"
We are amazed; and thus long have we stood,"I am astonished that I’ve stood here waiting so long and you haven’t yet kneeled,"
"Because we thought ourself thy lawful king: And if we be, how dare thy joints forget To pay their awful duty to our presence? If we be not, show us the hand of God For well we know, no hand of blood and bone Can grip the sacred handle of our sceptre, Unless he do profane, steal, or usurp. And though you think that all, as you have done, And we are barren and bereft of friends; Yet know, my master, God omnipotent, Is mustering in his clouds on our behalf Armies of pestilence; and they shall strike That lift your vassal hands against my head And threat the glory of my precious crown. Tell Bolingbroke—for yond methinks he stands— That every stride he makes upon my land The purple testament of bleeding war; But ere the crown he looks for live in peace, Ten thousand bloody crowns of mothers’ sons Shall ill become the flower of England’s face, To scarlet indignation and bedew Her pastures’ grass with faithful English blood.","since I thought I was still your lawful king. And if I am, how dare you not kneel in my presence? If I am not, prove to me that God has dismissed me from my position. No mortal man, after all, can take away my scepter, unless he steals it or usurps it against the will of God. Even if you think that, like you, everyone has put their souls in danger by turning away from me, and that I have no friends, you should know that God, my master, is gathering disease and agony in his clouds on my behalf. They will strike the unborn children of anyone who raises their hands against me and the glory of my crown. Tell Bolingbroke—for I think he’s standing over there—that every step he takes on my land is a dangerous act of treason. He has come to wage war against me. But ten thousand sons will die, faithful Englishman’s blood will stain the pastures, and peace will turn to anger before he ever gets the crown he seeks."
"The king of heaven forbid our lord the king Should so with civil and uncivil arms Harry Bolingbroke doth humbly kiss thy hand; And by the honourable tomb he swears, That stands upon your royal grandsire’s bones, And by the royalties of both your bloods, And by the buried hand of warlike Gaunt, And by the worth and honour of himself, Comprising all that may be sworn or said, His coming hither hath no further scope Enfranchisement immediate on his knees: Which on thy royal party granted once, His glittering arms he will commend to rust, His barbed steeds to stables, and his heart This swears he, as he is a prince, is just; And, as I am a gentleman, I credit him.","God forbid that anyone would attack the king! Your noble cousin Harry Bolingbroke kisses your hand. He swears by your grandfather’s grave, by the royal blood you share, by the buried hand of his father Gaunt, and by his own honor that he has no intention of doing anything but kneeling down and asking for his land and money back. Once you’ve given him that, he’ll commit to never use his weapons, to put his warhorses in stables, and to dedicate himself to your faithful service. He swears that this is fair to him as a prince. I, as a gentleman, believe him."
"Northumberland, say thus the king returns: His noble cousin is right welcome hither; Shall be accomplish’d without contradiction: With all the gracious utterance thou hast Speak to his gentle hearing kind commends. We do debase ourselves, cousin, do we not,","Cousin, aren’t I dishonoring myself by looking so wretched and speaking so kindly? Should I call back Northumberland and tell him to send only words of defiance to the traitor—and in doing so ensure that Bolingbroke’s army will kill me?"
"My lord, in the base court he doth attend To speak with you; may it please you to come down.","My lord, he waits in the outer court below to speak with you. Will you come down?"
"Wanting the manage of unruly jades. In the base court? Base court, where kings grow base, To come at traitors’ calls and do them grace. In the base court? Come down? Down, court! For night-owls shriek where mounting larks should sing.","I’m coming down, like shining Phaeton Son of Helios, the sun god, in Greek myth. Helios allowed him to drive the chariot of the sun, but Phaeton was unable to control the horses pulling the chariot. They veered too close to the earth, burning it, until Zeus struck Phaeton down with a thunderbolt. Phaeton unable to control unruly horses. In the bottom court? The bottom court, where kings become common enough to obey a traitor’s summons and bow to them. In the bottom court? Come down? The bottom court! And now the king is on the bottom! Everything is backward, and night owls shriek when mounting larks should be singing."
What says his majesty?,What does the king say?
Sorrow and grief of heart Yet he is come.,"His sorrow makes him speak foolishly, like a mad man. But he’s coming."
"Stand all apart, And show fair duty to his majesty.","Stand apart, and show your duty to the king."
"My gracious lord,—",My gracious lord.
"To make the base earth proud with kissing it: Me rather had my heart might feel your love Than my unpleased eye see your courtesy. Up, cousin, up; your heart is up, I know,","Fair cousin, you insult your princely knee by touching it to the lowly earth. I’d rather my heart feel your love than my eyes see your fake courtesy. Get up, cousin. Your heart is proud, I know, even if your knee is humbled."
"My gracious lord, I come but for mine own.","My gracious lord, I’m only here to reclaim my own property."
"Your own is yours, and I am yours, and all.","Your property is yours, and I am your king."
"So far be mine, my most redoubted lord, As my true service shall deserve your love.","My dreaded lord, you are my king only if I deserve your love."
"That know the strong’st and surest way to get. Uncle, give me your hands: nay, dry your eyes; Tears show their love, but want their remedies. Cousin, I am too young to be your father, What you will have, I’ll give, and willing too; For do we must what force will have us do. Set on towards London, cousin, is it so?","Uncle, give me your hands. No, dry your eyes. Tears show love, but do nothing to fix their cause. Cousin, I am too young to be your father, even though you are old enough to inherit my kingdom. I’ll willingly give you what you want, because you’ve forced me to do it. So now you’ll go to London, cousin?"
"Yea, my good lord.","Yes, my good lord."
Then I must not say no.,Then I can’t say no.
"What sport shall we devise here in this garden, To drive away the heavy thought of care?",What game should we play here in the garden to distract us from our worries?
"Madam, we’ll play at bowls.","Madam, let’s play bowls A game played by rolling slightly asymmetrical balls as close as possible to a white ball, known as a jack. bowls ."
"’Twill make me think the world is full of rubs,","It will make me think the world is full of obstacles, and that my fortune sends me the wrong way."
"Madam, we’ll dance.","Madam, we’ll dance."
"My legs can keep no measure in delight, When my poor heart no measure keeps in grief: Therefore, no dancing, girl; some other sport.","My legs can’t move with delight when my heart is so full of grief. Therefore, no dancing, girl. Let’s find some other sport."
"Madam, we’ll tell tales.","Madam, we’ll tell stories."
Of sorrow or of joy?,Sad ones or happy ones?
"Of either, madam.","Either, madam."
"Of neither, girl: For of joy, being altogether wanting, Or if of grief, being altogether had, It adds more sorrow to my want of joy: For what I have I need not to repeat; And what I want it boots not to complain.","Neither, girl. Since I have no happiness, happy stories only remind me of sorrow. Since I am full of grief, sad stories only add more sorrow to my lack of happiness. I don’t need to add on to what I already have, and it does no good to complain about what I want."
"Madam, I’ll sing.","Madam, I’ll sing."
"’Tis well that thou hast cause But thou shouldst please me better, wouldst thou weep.","It’s wonderful that you are happy enough to sing, but it would make me happier if you wept."
"I could weep, madam, would it do you good.","If it would do you any good, madam, I could weep."
"And I could sing, would weeping do me good,","And if weeping would do me any good, I would do it enough that I’d be able to sing."
"But stay, here come the gardeners: Let’s step into the shadow of these trees. My wretchedness unto a row of pins, They’ll talk of state; for every one doth so","But stop, here come the gardeners. Let’s move into the shadows of these trees. I’d only bet my most worthless possessions that they won’t talk about politics, since that’s what everyone does in anticipation of a change. Sorrow is always announced with sorrow."
"Go, bind thou up yon dangling apricocks, Which, like unruly children, make their sire Stoop with oppression of their prodigal weight: Give some supportance to the bending twigs. Cut off the heads of too fast growing sprays, That look too lofty in our commonwealth: All must be even in our government. You thus employ’d, I will go root away The soil’s fertility from wholesome flowers.","Go, gather up those dangling apricots. The tree is bending under their excessive weight, like a father oppressed by his unruly children. Give the twigs some support. Cut off the branches that are growing too fast and high in our country. Everything must be equal. While you’re doing that, I’ll go dig up those harmful weeds that are stealing all the nutrients in the soil from the flowers."
"Why should we in the compass of a pale Keep law and form and due proportion, Showing, as in a model, our firm estate, Is full of weeds, her fairest flowers choked up, Her fruit-trees all upturned, her hedges ruin’d, Her knots disorder’d and her wholesome herbs Swarming with caterpillars?","Why should we make this garden look like a model of beauty and order when the whole country is in disarray? If England were a garden, it would be full of weeds, with the most beautiful flowers choked to death. All the fruit trees would be torn out of the ground, the hedges would be ruined, the carefully designed flowerbeds would be a mess, and the herbs would be covered in caterpillars."
"He that hath suffer’d this disorder’d spring Hath now himself met with the fall of leaf: The weeds which his broad-spreading leaves did shelter, That seem’d in eating him to hold him up, I mean the Earl of Wiltshire, Bushy, Green.","Be quiet. The one who allowed this disordered mess to grow is now withering like a tree in autumn. The weeds that he sheltered with his leaves, and that seemed to prop him up while simultaneously destroying him, have been ripped up by Bolingbroke. I’m talking about the Earl of Wiltshire, Bushy, and Green."
"What, are they dead?","What, they are dead?"
"They are; and Bolingbroke Hath seized the wasteful king. O, what pity is it As we this garden! We at time of year Do wound the bark, the skin of our fruit-trees, Lest, being over-proud in sap and blood, With too much riches it confound itself: They might have lived to bear and he to taste Their fruits of duty: superfluous branches We lop away, that bearing boughs may live: Had he done so, himself had borne the crown,","They are, and Bolingbroke has taken the wasteful king into custody. Oh, it’s too bad that the king didn’t take care of his land as carefully as we tend this garden! At this time of year we pierce the bark, so that the fruit trees aren’t spoiled by too much of their own rich sap. If he had done the same thing to his men, who were spoiling from too much wealth and power, they might have served him better, and he would have profited. We cut the unnecessary branches off the trees, so that the ones that bear fruit will live. If he had done the same and cut away the unnecessary men in his service, he would still have the crown. But he wasted his time and lost it."
"What, think you then the king shall be deposed?","What, do you think the king will be dethroned?"
"Depress’d he is already, and deposed ’Tis doubt he will be: letters came last night To a dear friend of the good Duke of York’s,","He’s already been brought low, and it’s feared he’ll be dethroned. A dear friend of the Duke of York received letters last night with bad news."
"O, I am press’d to death through want of speaking!","Oh, not saying anything is killing me!"
"Thou, old Adam’s likeness, set to dress this garden, How dares thy harsh rude tongue sound this unpleasing news? What Eve, what serpent, hath suggested thee Why dost thou say King Richard is deposed? Darest thou, thou little better thing than earth, Divine his downfall? Say, where, when, and how, Camest thou by this ill tidings? speak, thou wretch.","You, gardener, how dare you say such awful things? What snake has tempted you to invent a second fall of man? Why do you say that King Richard is deposed? Do you dare predict his downfall when you are as low as the dirt? Tell me where, when, and how you heard these terrible things. Speak, you wretch."
"To breathe this news; yet what I say is true. King Richard, he is in the mighty hold Of Bolingbroke: their fortunes both are weigh’d: In your lord’s scale is nothing but himself, But in the balance of great Bolingbroke, Besides himself, are all the English peers, And with that odds he weighs King Richard down. Post you to London, and you will find it so;","Forgive me, madam. I’m not happy to say it, but it’s true. Bolingbroke has captured King Richard. Their fortunes are being weighed out. Your lord has only himself and his vanity, which makes him lighter. Great Bolingbroke has all the English peers with him, and that gives him greater weight than King Richard. If you hurry to London, you’ll see. I’m only saying what everyone knows."
"Nimble mischance, that art so light of foot, Doth not thy embassage belong to me, And am I last that knows it? O, thou think’st To serve me last, that I may longest keep To meet at London London’s king in woe. What, was I born to this, that my sad look Should grace the triumph of great Bolingbroke? Gardener, for telling me these news of woe,","Why am I the last to hear this bad news that concerns me? I’ll feel the sorrow the longest and yet I’m the last to know. Come, ladies, let’s go. We must go to London to see the king in his sorrow. Was this why I was born, to show my sad face while great Bolingbroke triumphs? Gardener, for telling me this awful news, I pray that your plants never grow."
"Poor queen! so that thy state might be no worse, I would my skill were subject to thy curse. Here did she fall a tear; here in this place I’ll set a bank of rue, sour herb of grace: In the remembrance of a weeping queen.","Poor queen! I wish her curse would strike my skill if it would help her. Her tear fell right here. I’ll plant rue there, since it is a bitter and sad herb. If only out of pity, rue will soon grow here in remembrance of a weeping queen."
"Call forth Bagot. Now, Bagot, freely speak thy mind; What thou dost know of noble Gloucester’s death, Who wrought it with the king, and who perform’d","Call forward Bagot. Now, Bagot, speak freely. What do you know about noble Gloucester’s death? Who conspired with the king to do it, and who actually killed him?"
Then set before my face the Lord Aumerle.,Bring Lord Aumerle forward.
"Cousin, stand forth, and look upon that man.","Cousin, stand in front and look at that man."
"My Lord Aumerle, I know your daring tongue Scorns to unsay what once it hath deliver’d. I heard you say, ‘Is not my arm of length, That reacheth from the restful English court As far as Calais, to mine uncle’s head?’ Amongst much other talk, that very time, The offer of an hundred thousand crowns Than Bolingbroke’s return to England; Adding withal how blest this land would be In this your cousin’s death.","My Lord Aumerle, I know you’re too brave to deny what you’ve already said. While Gloucester’s death was being plotted, I heard you say, “Isn’t my arm long enough to reach from the peaceful English court to Calais, to strike at my uncle’s head?” At that same time, I heard you say, among other things, that you would rather refuse a hundred thousand crowns than have Bolingbroke return to England. And you added that the country would be blessed if Bolingbroke, your cousin, died."
"What answer shall I make to this base man? Shall I so much dishonour my fair stars, On equal terms to give him chastisement? Either I must, or have mine honour soil’d There is my gage, the manual seal of death, That marks thee out for hell: I say, thou liest, And will maintain what thou hast said is false In thy heart-blood, though being all too base","Princes and noble lords, how should I respond to this lowly man? Should I dishonor my rank as a noble by chastising him on equal terms? I guess I must, or let him ruin my honor with this slanderous accusation. There is my glove, the symbol of your death. I say you lie, and I’ll confirm in combat that what you said is a lie, though I won’t stain my knightly sword with your common blood."
"Bagot, forbear; thou shalt not take it up.","Bagot, restrain yourself. You will not retaliate."
"Excepting one, I would he were the best In all this presence that hath moved me so.","Except for Bolingbroke, I wish Bagot were the most noble person here to have angered me like this."
"If that thy valour stand on sympathy, By that fair sun which shows me where thou stand’st, I heard thee say, and vauntingly thou spakest it That thou wert cause of noble Gloucester’s death. If thou deny’st it twenty times, thou liest; Where it was forged, with my rapier’s point.","If your courage depends on rank, there is my glove, Aumerle, to match your glove. I swear by the sun that shows me where you are that I heard you boast that you caused Gloucester’s death. Even if you deny it twenty times, you lie, and I’ll put that lie back in your heart, where it came from, with my sword."
"Thou darest not, coward, live to see that day.","Coward, you wouldn’t dare do it."
"Now by my soul, I would it were this hour.","By my soul, I wish I could do it right now."
"Fitzwater, thou art damn’d to hell for this.","Fitzwater, you’ll be damned to hell for this."
"In this appeal as thou art all unjust; And that thou art so, there I throw my gage, To prove it on thee to the extremest point Of mortal breathing: seize it, if thou darest.","Aumerle, you lie. His accusation is as true as your denial is false. And I’ll prove that you lie by throwing down my glove. Take it up, if you dare."
And never brandish more revengeful steel Over the glittering helmet of my foe!,"If I don’t, may my hands rot away and never again lift my sword over the helmet of my enemy!"
"I task the earth to the like, forsworn Aumerle; And spur thee on with full as many lies From sun to sun: there is my honour’s pawn; Engage it to the trial, if thou darest.","I’ll throw down my glove to you, too, lying Aumerle. And I’ll accuse you of lying right in your ear, from sunrise to sunset. There’s my pledge of honor. Pick it up, if you dare."
"Who sets me else? by heaven, I’ll throw at all: I have a thousand spirits in one breast,","Who else challenges me? By heaven, I’ll throw my glove at you all. My breast holds a thousand spirits that can outmatch twenty thousand like you."
"My Lord Fitzwater, I do remember well The very time Aumerle and you did talk.","My lord Fitzwater, I remember very well when you and Aumerle spoke."
’Tis very true: you were in presence then; And you can witness with me this is true.,"That’s true, you were there. And you can be my witness that this is true."
"As false, by heaven, as heaven itself is true.",It’s as false as heaven is true.
"Surrey, thou liest.","Surrey, you lie."
"Dishonourable boy! That lie shall lie so heavy on my sword, That it shall render vengeance and revenge In earth as quiet as thy father’s skull: In proof whereof, there is my honour’s pawn; Engage it to the trial, if thou darest.","Dishonorable boy! Your lie will give such weight to my sword that it will attack you in revenge until you’re lying in the grave as quiet as your dead father. As proof, there’s my glove. Take it up, if you dare."
"How fondly dost thou spur a forward horse! I dare meet Surrey in a wilderness, And spit upon him, whilst I say he lies, And lies, and lies: there is my bond of faith, To tie thee to my strong correction. Aumerle is guilty of my true appeal: Besides, I heard the banish’d Norfolk say That thou, Aumerle, didst send two of thy men To execute the noble duke at Calais.","You taunt me so foolishly! As easily as I dare to eat or drink or breathe or live, I dare to meet Surrey in a wild place and spit on him, all the while declaring that he lies. There is my response, so that you can’t run away from it. I intend to do well in this new kingdom, and Aumerle is guilty. Besides, I heard the banished Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Mowbray, say that you, Aumerle, sent two of your men to kill the noble duke at Calais."
"That Norfolk lies: here do I throw down this, If he may be repeal’d, to try his honour.","Someone lend me a glove so I can prove that Mowbray lies. Here, I throw down this, so that I may test his honor if he’s ever brought back."
"These differences shall all rest under gage Till Norfolk be repeal’d: repeal’d he shall be, To all his lands and signories: when he’s return’d, Against Aumerle we will enforce his trial.","All these quarrels will be put on hold until Mowbray is recalled from exile, as he will be. Even though he is my enemy, he’ll be given back his land and titles. And when he comes back, we’ll have his trial against Aumerle."
"That honourable day shall ne’er be seen. Many a time hath banish’d Norfolk fought Streaming the ensign of the Christian cross Against black pagans, Turks, and Saracens: And toil’d with works of war, retired himself To Italy; and there at Venice gave And his pure soul unto his captain Christ, Under whose colours he had fought so long.","That day will never happen. Many times did Mowbray fight for Jesus Christ in battle and raised the Christian cross against the black pagans, Turks, and Saracens. Exhausted by war, he retired to Italy. He gave his body to its soil in Venice and gave his pure soul to Christ, under whose banner he fought for so long."
"Why, bishop, is Norfolk dead?","Why, bishop, is Mowbray dead?"
"As surely as I live, my lord.","As surely as I am alive, my lord."
"Of good old Abraham! Lords appellants, Your differences shall all rest under gage Till we assign you to your days of trial.","May peace take his sweet soul to Abraham! Lords, we’ll keep all these challenges until we can set days for your trials."
"Great Duke of Lancaster, I come to thee Adopts thee heir, and his high sceptre yields To the possession of thy royal hand: Ascend his throne, descending now from him; And long live Henry, fourth of that name!","Great Duke of Lancaster, I come to you from humbled Richard, who is willing to make you his heir and yields his royal scepter to your hands. Take his throne from him, and long live Henry, the fourth king with that name!"
"In God’s name, I’ll ascend the regal throne.","In God’s name, I’ll take the royal throne."
"Marry. God forbid! Worst in this royal presence may I speak, Yet best beseeming me to speak the truth. Would God that any in this noble presence Of noble Richard! then true noblesse would Learn him forbearance from so foul a wrong. What subject can give sentence on his king? And who sits here that is not Richard’s subject? Although apparent guilt be seen in them; And shall the figure of God’s majesty, His captain, steward, deputy-elect, Anointed, crowned, planted many years, And he himself not present? O, forfend it, God, That in a Christian climate souls refined Should show so heinous, black, obscene a deed! I speak to subjects, and a subject speaks, My Lord of Hereford here, whom you call king, Is a foul traitor to proud Hereford’s king: And if you crown him, let me prophesy: The blood of English shall manure the ground, Peace shall go sleep with Turks and infidels, And in this seat of peace tumultuous wars Shall kin with kin and kind with kind confound; Disorder, horror, fear and mutiny The field of Golgotha and dead men’s skulls. O, if you raise this house against this house, It will the woefullest division prove That ever fell upon this cursed earth. Lest child, child’s children, cry against you woe!","God forbid! I’m the least worthy to speak in this noble company, but it’s fitting that I, a clergyman, speak the truth. If only one of the nobles here were noble enough to judge Richard! Then he would restrain himself from committing such a wrong. What subject can pass judgment on his king? And who here isn’t Richard’s subject? Even thieves aren’t judged unless they’re present, even when they’re obviously guilty. Shall the image of God’s majesty, who is His chosen deputy and caretaker and has been so for many years, be judged by his inferiors without even being present? Oh, God, don’t allow such refined souls in a Christian land to be so obscene. I’m speaking to subjects as a subject, because I’ve been moved by God to speak boldly for his king. You might call my Lord of Hereford here king, but he is a traitor to his king. If you give him the crown, I predict that the blood of the English will soak the soil, and future generations will regret this act. Peace will leave England and go to the Turks and infidels, while we will have terrible wars that will pit families against each other. Disorder, fear, mutiny, and horror will live here, and it will be known as a place of terror and skulls. If you pit your family against his That is, Lancaster against York. family against his , it will prove to be the worst division ever to take place on earth. Prevent it from happening. Don’t let it be so, or your children and your grandchildren will lament your actions!"
"Well have you argued, sir; and, for your pains, Of capital treason we arrest you here. My Lord of Westminster, be it your charge May it please you, lords, to grant the commons’ suit.","You’ve argued well, and in return we’re arresting you for capital treason. My Lord of Westminster, it’s your responsibility to keep him safe until he goes on trial. My lords, please grant the commons’ suit."
"Fetch hither Richard, that in common view He may surrender; so we shall proceed Without suspicion.","Bring Richard here, so that he can surrender in public. That way I can proceed without suspicion."
I will be his conduct.,I’ll escort him.
"Lords, you that here are under our arrest, Procure your sureties for your days of answer. Little are we beholding to your love, And little look’d for at your helping hands.","You lords who are here under arrest, arrange for someone to pledge that you’ll be here for your trial. I don’t owe you anything, and I don’t expect to receive any love from you."
"Before I have shook off the regal thoughts Wherewith I reign’d? I hardly yet have learn’d To insinuate, flatter, bow, and bend my limbs: Give sorrow leave awhile to tutor me The favours of these men: were they not mine? Did they not sometime cry, ‘all hail!’ to me? So Judas did to Christ: but he, in twelve, Found truth in all but one: I, in twelve thousand, none. Am I both priest and clerk? well then, amen. God save the king! although I be not he; And yet, amen, if heaven do think him me. To do what service am I sent for hither?","Alas, why does the king call for me when I’ve only just resigned myself to give up the throne? I’ve hardly had time to learn to act like a subject, who has to indulge the king and bow to him. Give me some time with my sorrow so that I can learn how to submit to another. I still remember how these men used to serve me. Didn’t they once cry out, “All hail!” to me? But then so did Judas to Christ once. But Christ had eleven honest followers out of twelve. I don’t have one out of twelve thousand. God save the king! Won’t anyone say amen? Do I have to both give the blessing and affirm it? Well then, amen. God save the king! Even though I am not the king. And yet, I’ll say amen in case heaven still considers me the king. Why have you sent for me?"
"Which tired majesty did make thee offer, The resignation of thy state and crown To Henry Bolingbroke.","You have to give up your country and your crown to Henry Bolingbroke of your own free will, even though you’ve already given it over through your defeat."
"Give me the crown. Here, cousin, seize the crown; On this side my hand, and on that side yours. Now is this golden crown like a deep well That owes two buckets, filling one another, The emptier ever dancing in the air, That bucket down and full of tears am I, Drinking my griefs, whilst you mount up on high.","Give me the crown. Here, cousin, take the crown. Here cousin. I’ll put my hand on this side of it, and you put yours on the other. Now this golden crown looks like a well that has two buckets, and raising one causes the other to drop and fill up. One is empty and dances up in the air, while the other is down in the well and full of water. I’m the bucket at the bottom, full of tears, and you are the one risen to the top."
I thought you had been willing to resign.,I thought you were willing to give up the crown.
My crown I am; but still my griefs are mine: But not my griefs; still am I king of those.,"I’m willing to give up my crown, but my sadness is still mine. You can take my glory and my royal status, but I still rule over my grief."
Part of your cares you give me with your crown.,You’ll lose some of those worries when you give the crown to me.
"Your cares set up do not pluck my cares down. My care is loss of care, by old care done; The cares I give I have, though given away; They tend the crown, yet still with me they stay.","Just because you gain those worries doesn’t mean I lose them. I’m worried by their loss and by what has happened. Your concern is the new responsibilities you are taking on. I’ll keep my worries even if I give away their cause, the crown."
Are you contented to resign the crown?,Are you willing to give up the crown?
"Ay, no; no, ay; for I must nothing be; Now mark me, how I will undo myself; I give this heavy weight from off my head And this unwieldy sceptre from my hand, The pride of kingly sway from out my heart; With mine own hands I give away my crown, With mine own tongue deny my sacred state, With mine own breath release all duty’s rites: All pomp and majesty I do forswear; My acts, decrees, and statutes I deny: God pardon all oaths that are broke to me! God keep all vows unbroke that swear to thee! Make me, that nothing have, with nothing grieved, Long mayst thou live in Richard’s seat to sit, And soon lie Richard in an earthly pit! God save King Harry, unking’d Richard says, And send him many years of sunshine days!","Yes and no. No and yes, since I must not be anything. So, no, no, because I give it up to you. Now look, I’ll make myself nothing. I’ll give you this heavy crown from my head, and this scepter from my hand. I’ll take the pride of being king out of my heart. My own tears will wash away the oil that made me king. My own hands will give away the crown. My own tongue will deny my sacred right to be king. My own breath will give up all oaths of allegiance made to me. I give up all the ritual and ceremony, all my homes, my income, and reject all the laws I enacted. May God pardon everyone who breaks his oath to me! May God keep them from breaking their oath to you! Let me grieve for nothing since I have nothing, and let you be pleased with everything since you have everything! May you live long in my place, and let me be buried soon! God save King Harry, former King Richard says, and let him have many happy days! What else is left?"
"No more, but that you read These accusations and these grievous crimes Committed by your person and your followers Against the state and profit of this land; May deem that you are worthily deposed.","Nothing but for you to read aloud all the accusations and crimes that you and your followers committed against the wellbeing and prosperity of this country. Once you’ve confessed, everyone can agree that you’ve been justly dethroned."
"Must I do so? and must I ravel out My weaved-up folly? Gentle Northumberland, If thy offences were upon record, To read a lecture of them? If thou wouldst, There shouldst thou find one heinous article, Containing the deposing of a king And cracking the strong warrant of an oath, Nay, all of you that stand and look upon, Whilst that my wretchedness doth bait myself, Though some of you with Pilate wash your hands Showing an outward pity; yet you Pilates And water cannot wash away your sin.","Do I have to? Do I have to list out these charges? Dear Northumberland, if all your crimes were listed out, wouldn’t you be ashamed to read them in front of such a distinguished group? If you did, you’d find on the list the terrible crime of deposing a king and breaking an oath, crimes condemned by heaven. All of you who are watching me act out my miserable fate here pretend like Pilate The Roman governor of Judea who ordered the crucifixion of Jesus. He washed his hands to signify that the execution took place at the request of the Jews and he took no responsibility. Pilate that you’ve done nothing wrong and look at me with pity. But you’ve all played a part in bringing me to this state, and you can’t deny your sin."
"My lord, dispatch; read o’er these articles.","My lord, get on with it. Read the charges."
"Mine eyes are full of tears, I cannot see: And yet salt water blinds them not so much Nay, if I turn mine eyes upon myself, I find myself a traitor with the rest; For I have given here my soul’s consent To undeck the pompous body of a king; Proud majesty a subject, state a peasant.","My eyes are full of tears and I can’t see. But even so, I can see a group of traitors in front of me. And if I look at myself, I see just as great a traitor. I’ve agreed to give up my royal garments, made nobility common, and made a master a slave. I’ve made a king a subject and made the richest the poorest."
"My lord,—",My lord—
"No lord of thine, thou haught insulting man, Nor no man’s lord; I have no name, no title, But ’tis usurp’d: alack the heavy day, That I have worn so many winters out, And know not now what name to call myself! O that I were a mockery king of snow, To melt myself away in water-drops! Good king, great king, and yet not greatly good, An if my word be sterling yet in England, Let it command a mirror hither straight, Since it is bankrupt of his majesty.","I’m not your lord, you haughty, insulting man. I’m no man’s lord. I don’t have a name or a title. The name I was baptized with is no longer mine. How sad it is that I am so old and I don’t know what to call myself! If only I were a snowman, I could stand in front of the sun of Bolingbroke and let myself be melted! Good king, great king, but not a very good man. If my commands still have value in England, let me command someone to bring me a mirror, so I may see what I look like without any of my noble majesty."
Go some of you and fetch a looking-glass.,Someone go and get a mirror.
Read o’er this paper while the glass doth come.,Read this paper until the mirror arrives.
"Fiend, thou torment’st me ere I come to hell!","Fiend, you are torturing me before I even get to hell!"
"Urge it no more, my Lord Northumberland.","Lord Northumberland, stop asking him to read it."
The commons will not then be satisfied.,The House of Commons won’t be satisfied.
"They shall be satisfied: I’ll read enough, When I do see the very book indeed Where all my sins are writ, and that’s myself.",They’ll get what they want. I’ll read it when I can look at my face and see the sins that appear there.
"No deeper wrinkles yet? hath sorrow struck So many blows upon this face of mine, And made no deeper wounds? O flattering glass, Like to my followers in prosperity, That every day under his household roof Did keep ten thousand men? was this the face That, like the sun, did make beholders wink? Was this the face that faced so many follies, A brittle glory shineth in this face: As brittle as the glory is the face;","Give me the mirror, and I’ll read what’s on my face. No deeper wrinkles yet? Could I endure so many sorrows without them appearing on my face? Oh flattering mirror, you are lying to me just like my followers did during happier times. Was this the same man who once kept ten thousand men in his employ? Was this the face that made men lower their gaze, as if they were looking into the sun? Was this the same face that endured so many challenges until it was defeated by Bolingbroke? There’s a fragile glory in this face, and it’s a face as fragile as glory."
"For there it is, crack’d in a hundred shivers. Mark, silent king, the moral of this sport,","Look, there it is in a hundred pieces. Pay attention, king, to what this means. Sorrow has so quickly destroyed my face."
The shadow of your sorrow hath destroy’d The shadow or your face.,It’s only the outward gloom of your sorrow that has destroyed the appearance of your face.
"Say that again. The shadow of my sorrow! ha! let’s see: And these external manners of laments Are merely shadows to the unseen grief That swells with silence in the tortured soul; There lies the substance: and I thank thee, king, Me cause to wail but teachest me the way How to lament the cause. I’ll beg one boon, And then be gone and trouble you no more. Shall I obtain it?","Say that again. The outward gloom of my sorrow! Ha! Let’s see. It’s true that my grief is inside me and that anything I say or do to indicate my grief is just the outward reflection of what’s inside. Thank you, king, for being so kind as to not only give me reason to grieve but also to teach me how to show my grief. I’ll beg one favor, and then I’ll go away and no longer bother you. Will you give it to me?"
"Name it, fair cousin.","Whatever you want, fair cousin."
"‘Fair cousin’? I am greater than a king: For when I was a king, my flatterers Were then but subjects; being now a subject, I have a king here to my flatterer.","“Fair cousin”? I must be mightier than a king, since when I was a king subjects flattered me, but now that I’m a subject the king flatters me. Since I’m so mighty, I don’t need to beg."
Yet ask.,Ask anyway.
And shall I have?,And will I have it?
You shall.,You will.
Then give me leave to go.,Then give me permission to go.
Whither?,Where?
"Whither you will, so I were from your sights.","Wherever you want, as long as it is away from you."
"Go, some of you convey him to the Tower.","Go, some of you take him to the tower."
"O, good! convey? conveyers are you all, That rise thus nimbly by a true king’s fall.",Oh good! Take me? You’re all takers who’ve risen so mightily by my downfall.
"Our coronation: lords, prepare yourselves.","Next Wednesday, I’ll be crowned. Lords, prepare for it."
A woeful pageant have we here beheld.,This is a sad scene we’ve witnessed.
The woe’s to come; the children yet unborn. Shall feel this day as sharp to them as thorn.,The sadness is yet to come. Children who aren’t even born yet will feel the effects of this day like a thorn in their side.
To rid the realm of this pernicious blot?,"You holy men, isn’t there a way we can get rid of this terrible ruler?"
"My lord, Before I freely speak my mind herein, You shall not only take the sacrament Whatever I shall happen to devise. I see your brows are full of discontent, Your hearts of sorrow and your eyes of tears: Come home with me to supper; and I’ll lay","My lord, before I speak freely, you must swear to keep this a secret and also to promise that whatever plan I come up with is carried out. I see how unhappy you are. Come home with me for supper. I’ll put forward a plot that will make us all happy."
"This way the king will come; this is the way To Julius Caesar’s ill-erected tower, To whose flint bosom my condemned lord Is doom’d a prisoner by proud Bolingbroke: Have any resting for her true king’s queen.","The king will come this way as he is taken to the tower, where proud Bolingbroke condemned him to be held a prisoner. Let’s rest here, if there is anywhere on this rebellious earth where I can rest."
"But soft, but see, or rather do not see, My fair rose wither: yet look up, behold, That you in pity may dissolve to dew, Ah, thou, the model where old Troy did stand, Thou map of honour, thou King Richard’s tomb, And not King Richard; thou most beauteous inn, Why should hard-favour’d grief be lodged in thee,","But wait, but look, or rather don’t look or you will wither. No, but look up, and let pity wash over you and your tears of love bathe him. Ah, you, fallen in greatness like Troy The city besieged and destroyed by the Greeks in the Trojan War. Troy , the epitome of honor. You look like a shell of King Richard and not King Richard himself. Oh, why should grief live in you, who are so honorable and royal, while triumph lives within Bolingbroke, a commoner?"
"Join not with grief, fair woman, do not so, To make my end too sudden: learn, good soul, To think our former state a happy dream; From which awaked, the truth of what we are To grim Necessity, and he and I Will keep a league till death. Hie thee to France And cloister thee in some religious house: Our holy lives must win a new world’s crown,","Fair lady, don’t grieve as if I were already dead. Think of our past as a happy dream and that we have simply awoken to reality. I’ve had to bow to necessity, and I’ll stay that way until I die. Go quickly to France and join a convent. Our only hope is to become holy and be crowned in heaven, since our lives here have ended in such ruin."
"What, is my Richard both in shape and mind Transform’d and weaken’d? hath Bolingbroke deposed Thine intellect? hath he been in thy heart? The lion dying thrusteth forth his paw, To be o’erpower’d; and wilt thou, pupil-like, Take thy correction mildly, kiss the rod, And fawn on rage with base humility, Which art a lion and a king of beasts?","What, has my Richard been changed and weakened in both body and mind? Has Bolingbroke overthrown your mind? Has he turned your heart? The dying lion claws at the earth, if nothing else, in his rage at being defeated. Will you act like a rebuked student and take your punishment meekly, kiss the cane that beats you, and return rage with humility, when you are a lion and king of beasts?"
"I had been still a happy king of men. Good sometime queen, prepare thee hence for France: Think I am dead and that even here thou takest, As from my death-bed, thy last living leave. With good old folks and let them tell thee tales Of woeful ages long ago betid; And ere thou bid good night, to quit their griefs, Tell thou the lamentable tale of me For why, the senseless brands will sympathize The heavy accent of thy moving tongue And in compassion weep the fire out; And some will mourn in ashes, some coal-black,","A king of beasts, indeed. If only they weren’t beasts, I would still be a happy king of men. Good former queen, get ready to go to France. Think of me as dead, and say goodbye to me now as if I were on my deathbed. Through long winter nights sit by the fire with good people and let them tell you stories of sad times long ago. And before you say good night, tell them my sadder story and send them weeping to their beds. Even the firewood will sympathize and cry out their fires. And some will be so unhappy at the story of the overthrow of a rightful king that they will cover themselves in ashes."
"My lord, the mind of Bolingbroke is changed: You must to Pomfret, not unto the Tower. And, madam, there is order ta’en for you; With all swift speed you must away to France.","My lord, Bolingbroke has changed his mind. You must go to Pomfret A castle in Yorkshire. Pomfret instead of the tower. And madam, he’s made arrangements for you to go to France as quickly as possible."
"The mounting Bolingbroke ascends my throne, The time shall not be many hours of age More than it is ere foul sin gathering head Shalt break into corruption: thou shalt think, It is too little, helping him to all; And he shall think that thou, which know’st the way To plant unrightful kings, wilt know again, Being ne’er so little urged, another way The love of wicked men converts to fear; That fear to hate, and hate turns one or both To worthy danger and deserved death.","Northumberland, Bolingbroke is mounting my throne on your ladder, but it won’t take very long until you turn against each other. You’ll think that even though he gives you half the kingdom, it’s not enough, since you helped him get it all. And he’ll think that you, who knows how to put undeserving kings in the throne, will know how to remove him from the stolen throne. Wicked men’s love soon turns to fear, then to hate, and from there one or both of them will become dangerous and die a violent death."
"My guilt be on my head, and there an end.","My guilt is on my own head An allusion to the Jews who said at Jesus’ trial, “His death be upon our heads, and the heads of our children.” guilt is on my own head , and that’s an end to it. Say goodbye and separate, for you must depart shortly."
"Doubly divorced! Bad men, you violate A twofold marriage, ’twixt my crown and me, And then betwixt me and my married wife. Let me unkiss the oath ’twixt thee and me; Part us, Northumberland; I toward the north, Where shivering cold and sickness pines the clime; My wife to France: from whence, set forth in pomp, She came adorned hither like sweet May,","Twice divorced! You force me to divorce my crown and now my wife. I can’t undo with a kiss the vows that bound us together, because they were sealed with a kiss. Separate us, Northumberland. I’ll go to the north, where cold and sickness afflict the region. And my wife goes to France, from where she came with celebration like the spring, and now is sent back like the dead of winter."
And must we be divided? must we part?,And do we have to be separated?
"Ay, hand from hand, my love, and heart from heart.","Yes, my love, our hands and our hearts must be divided."
Banish us both and send the king with me.,"Banish us both, and send the king with me."
That were some love but little policy.,"That might be an act of love, but it’s not a smart policy."
"Then whither he goes, thither let me go.","Then wherever he goes, let me follow him."
"So two, together weeping, make one woe. Weep thou for me in France, I for thee here; Better far off than near, be ne’er the near. Go, count thy way with sighs; I mine with groans.","So the two of us together will make one big sorrow. Weep for me in France, and I’ll weep for you here. It’s better for us to be far away than near, and never near each other again. Go measure the distance in sighs, and I’ll do the same with groans."
So longest way shall have the longest moans.,"So the farther I go, the longer I will moan."
"Twice for one step I’ll groan, the way being short, And piece the way out with a heavy heart. Come, come, in wooing sorrow let’s be brief, Since, wedding it, there is such length in grief; Thus give I mine, and thus take I thy heart.","Since my way is shorter, I’ll groan twice for every step I take and make the way longer with a sad heart. Come, let’s cut short this talk of grief, because we’ll have long enough to live with it. Let’s kiss once and quiet our mouths and part without any more words. I give you my heart and take yours with me."
"Give me mine own again; ’twere no good part To take on me to keep and kill thy heart. So, now I have mine own again, be gone,","Give me my heart back. It will only kill your heart if I take it. So now that I have my own heart back, go, so I can try to kill my own with mourning."
"We make woe wanton with this fond delay: Once more, adieu; the rest let sorrow say.","We’re only encouraging sorrow with this delay. Once more, goodbye. My grief will say the rest."
"My lord, you told me you would tell the rest, When weeping made you break the story off, of our two cousins coming into London.","My lord, you told me you would tell the rest of the story about our two relatives coming to London, until weeping made you stop."
Where did I leave?,Where did I stop the story?
Where rude misgovern’d hands from windows’ tops Threw dust and rubbish on King Richard’s head.,"At the sad place, my lord, when rude hands were throwing dust and rubbish on King Richard’s head from the upper windows."
"Then, as I said, the duke, great Bolingbroke, Mounted upon a hot and fiery steed With slow but stately pace kept on his course, Whilst all tongues cried ‘God save thee, Bolingbroke!’ You would have thought the very windows spake, Through casements darted their desiring eyes Upon his visage, and that all the walls With painted imagery had said at once ‘Jesu preserve thee! welcome, Bolingbroke!’ Bareheaded, lower than his proud steed’s neck, Bespake them thus: ‘I thank you, countrymen:’ And thus still doing, thus he pass’d along.","Then, as I said, the duke, great Bolingbroke, got on a magnificent horse that seemed to know it was him and kept going in a slow and stately way. All around, people were calling, “God save you, Bolingbroke!” You would have thought the windows themselves were talking. Both old and young people were looking out on him with happy desire, and on the painted walls all around was written, “Jesus protect you! Welcome, Bolingbroke!” Meanwhile, he was turning his head, bare of any helmet and not even as tall as his horse’s neck, and said, “I thank you, countrymen.” And he continued along saying this as he went."
"Alack, poor Richard! where rode he the whilst?","Alas, poor Richard? Where was he riding then?"
"After a well-graced actor leaves the stage, Are idly bent on him that enters next, Thinking his prattle to be tedious; Even so, or with much more contempt, men’s eyes No joyful tongue gave him his welcome home: But dust was thrown upon his sacred head: Which with such gentle sorrow he shook off, His face still combating with tears and smiles, That had not God, for some strong purpose, steel’d The hearts of men, they must perforce have melted And barbarism itself have pitied him. But heaven hath a hand in these events, To Bolingbroke are we sworn subjects now, Whose state and honour I for aye allow.","People looked at him with the dissatisfaction they might have for a supporting actor who comes on stage after the star has left. They stared at him with contempt, and no one cried out, “God save him!” No one welcomed him back. Instead, they threw dust on his sacred head. He shook it off with gentle sorrow, while he both cried and smiled as he wrestled with grief and patience. For some reason God must have hardened everyone’s hearts, otherwise they would have melted so that even a barbarian would have pitied him. But heaven has ordered all this, and we must follow its will. We are Bolingbroke’s subjects now, and I must forever acknowledge his rule and honor."
Here comes my son Aumerle.,Here comes my son Aumerle.
"Aumerle that was; And, madam, you must call him Rutland now: I am in parliament pledge for his truth And lasting fealty to the new-made king.","He was Duke of Aumerle, but because he was Richard’s friend, he has lost his title. You must call him Rutland He retains the title of Earl of Rutland. Rutland now. I’ve sworn in Parliament that he will honor and obey our new king."
"Welcome, my son: who are the violets now","Welcome, my son. Who are the new favorites of the king?"
"Madam, I know not, nor I greatly care not: God knows I had as lief be none as one.","Madam, I don’t know and I don’t care. God knows I prefer just as much not to be one."
"Well, bear you well in this new spring of time, Lest you be cropp’d before you come to prime.","Well, hold yourself upright in this new regime, or you’ll die before your time. What’s the news from Oxford? Are the jousts and festivities happening?"
"For aught I know, my lord, they do.",For all I know they are.
"You will be there, I know.","You will be there, I know."
"If God prevent not, I purpose so.","I mean to, unless God prevents it."
"What seal is that, that hangs without thy bosom?",What is the note that I see in your shirt? You’ve just gone white. Let me see what it says.
"My lord, ’tis nothing.","My lord, it’s nothing."
"No matter, then, who see it; I will be satisfied; let me see the writing.","Then it doesn’t matter who sees it. I want to see it, and I will."
I do beseech your grace to pardon me: Which for some reasons I would not have seen.,"I beg you to forgive me. It’s a small matter, but one that I don’t want to share for certain reasons."
"Which for some reasons, sir, I mean to see. I fear, I fear,—",I want to see it because of those reasons. I fear—
What should you fear? For gay apparel ’gainst the triumph day.,What should you fear? It’s just a bill for some festive clothing for the celebration.
"Bound to himself! what doth he with a bond That he is bound to? Wife, thou art a fool. Boy, let me see the writing.","A bill that he’s wearing so close to himself! Wife, you are a fool. Boy, let me see what it says."
"I do beseech you, pardon me; I may not show it.","I beg you, forgive me. I can’t show you."
"I will be satisfied; let me see it, I say.",I will see it.
Treason! foul treason! Villain! traitor! slave!,Treason! Foul treason! Villain! Traitor! Slave!
"What is the matter, my lord?","What is the matter, my lord?"
Ho! who is within there?,"Hey, who is inside?"
"God for his mercy, what treachery is here!","Saddle my horse. God have mercy, what treachery is this!"
"Why, what is it, my lord?","Why, what is it, my lord?"
"Give me my boots, I say; saddle my horse. Now, by mine honour, by my life, by my troth,","Give me my boots and saddle my horse. Now, by my honor, my life, and my vow, I will accuse the villain."
What is the matter?,What’s the matter?
"Peace, foolish woman.","Be quiet, foolish woman."
"I will not peace. What is the matter, Aumerle.","I won’t be quiet. What is the matter, Aumerle?"
"Good mother, be content; it is no more","Good mother, don’t worry. It is something that I have to answer with my own life."
Thy life answer!,Answer with your life!
Bring me my boots: I will unto the king.,Bring me my boots. I must go to the king.
"Strike him, Aumerle. Poor boy, thou art amazed. Hence, villain! never more come in my sight.","Hit him She’s instructing her son to hit the servant. him , Aumerle! Poor boy, you are distraught. Go away, villain! Don’t come back."
"Give me my boots, I say.","Give me my boots, I say."
"Why, York, what wilt thou do? Wilt thou not hide the trespass of thine own? Have we more sons? or are we like to have? Is not my teeming date drunk up with time? And rob me of a happy mother’s name? Is he not like thee? is he not thine own?","Why, York, what are you going to do? Won’t you hide the crime of your own child? Do we have any other sons? Are we likely to have more? Aren’t I too old to have children? And are you going to take away my son in my old age, so I can no longer call myself a mother? Doesn’t he look like you? Isn’t he your son?"
"Thou fond mad woman, Wilt thou conceal this dark conspiracy? And interchangeably set down their hands, To kill the king at Oxford.","Foolish madwoman, will you try to cover up this terrible conspiracy? A dozen have sworn and signed here that they’ll kill the king at Oxford."
He shall be none; We’ll keep him here: then what is that to him?,"He won’t be one of them. We’ll keep him here, and then what will this affair have to do with him?"
I would appeach him.,"Get away, foolish woman! Even if he were my son twenty times over, I would accuse him."
"Hadst thou groan’d for him As I have done, thou wouldst be more pitiful. But now I know thy mind; thou dost suspect And that he is a bastard, not thy son: Sweet York, sweet husband, be not of that mind: He is as like thee as a man may be, Not like to me, or any of my kin,","If you had gone through labor with him as I had, you would be more sorrowful. But now I know what you think. You think that I’ve cheated on you, and that he’s a bastard and not your son. Sweet York, my sweet husband, don’t think that way. He looks as much like you as anyone could. He doesn’t look anything like me, or like anyone in my family, but I still love him."
"Make way, unruly woman!","Make way, you wild woman!"
"After, Aumerle! mount thee upon his horse; Spur post, and get before him to the king, And beg thy pardon ere he do accuse thee. I doubt not but to ride as fast as York: And never will I rise up from the ground Till Bolingbroke have pardon’d thee. Away, be gone!","Go after him, Aumerle! Take his horse, get to the king before him, and beg forgiveness before he can even accuse you. I’ll be right behind. Though I am old, I can ride as fast as York. I’ll prostrate myself before the king until he has forgiven you. Go on!"
"Can no man tell me of my unthrifty son? ’Tis full three months since I did see him last; If any plague hang over us, ’tis he. I would to God, my lords, he might be found: For there, they say, he daily doth frequent, With unrestrained loose companions, Even such, they say, as stand in narrow lanes, And beat our watch, and rob our passengers; Takes on the point of honour to support So dissolute a crew.","Can’t anyone tell me about my irresponsible son? It’s been three months since I last saw him. He’s the only trouble in my life. I want him found. Ask in London, around the bars there. They say he goes to them every day with immoral friends, the kind of people who ambush passersby in the street and beat and rob the guards. My pleasure-seeking son thinks it’s a badge of honor to support such an awful crowd."
"My lord, some two days since I saw the prince, And told him of those triumphs held at Oxford.","My lord, two days ago I saw the prince and told him about the celebration at Oxford."
And what said the gallant?,And what did he say?
"His answer was, he would unto the stews, And from the common’st creature pluck a glove, And wear it as a favour; and with that He would unhorse the lustiest challenger.",He said that he would go to the whorehouse and get a glove from the most promiscuous whore there to wear as a favor. And then he would win in the jousts.
"I see some sparks of better hope, which elder years May happily bring forth. But who comes here?","Even if he is immoral and reckless, I still see some hope that his better qualities will emerge as he gets older. But who is approaching?"
Where is the king?,Where is the king?
"What means our cousin, that he stares and looks",Why does my cousin stare and look about him so wildly?
"God save your grace! I do beseech your majesty, To have some conference with your grace alone.",God save your grace! I beg to speak to you alone.
"Withdraw yourselves, and leave us here alone.","Go away, and leave us here alone."
What is the matter with our cousin now?,What is the matter with you now?
My tongue cleave to my roof within my mouth Unless a pardon ere I rise or speak.,May my knees remain on the ground and my tongue stay silent until you give me your forgiveness.
"Intended or committed was this fault? If on the first, how heinous e’er it be,","Is it an offense that you have committed or that you planned to commit? If it was planned only, no matter how terrible it is, I’ll forgive you in order to win your love."
"Then give me leave that I may turn the key, That no man enter till my tale be done.",Then let me lock the door so no one else can come in until I’m finished telling you.
Have thy desire.,Go ahead.
"[Within] My liege, beware; look to thyself;","(speaking from off-stage) My lord, beware. Watch yourself. You have a traitor with you."
"Villain, I’ll make thee safe.","Villain, I’ll render you harmless."
Stay thy revengeful hand; thou hast no cause to fear.,Hold off from your revenge. You don’t have any reason to be afraid.
"[Within] Open the door, secure, foolhardy king: Shall I for love speak treason to thy face?","(speaking from off-stage) Open the door, my foolish king. Should I harshly criticize you out of love for you? Open the door, or I’ll break it down."
"What is the matter, uncle? speak; Recover breath; tell us how near is danger, That we may arm us to encounter it.","What is the matter, uncle? Tell me. Catch your breath. Tell me how close the danger is so that I can prepare for it."
"Peruse this writing here, and thou shalt know","Read this, and you’ll know what treason made me hurry so fast that I can hardly speak."
"Remember, as thou read’st, thy promise pass’d: I do repent me; read not my name there My heart is not confederate with my hand.","Remember, as you read, what you just promised. I already regret it. Don’t read my name there. My heart doesn’t match what my hand wrote."
"It was, villain, ere thy hand did set it down. Fear, and not love, begets his penitence: Forget to pity him, lest thy pity prove A serpent that will sting thee to the heart.","Villain, your heart believed it before your hand wrote it. I took the paper from the traitor, king. He regrets it out of fear, not out of love for you. Don’t pity him, because that pity will come back to harm you."
"O heinous, strong and bold conspiracy! Thou sheer, immaculate and silver fountain, From when this stream through muddy passages Hath held his current and defiled himself! Thy overflow of good converts to bad, This deadly blot in thy digressing son.","Oh, what a terrible and bold conspiracy! Oh, loyal father of a treacherous son! Your pure goodness overwhelms the wrongdoing of your foul son. Because you have proven yourself so loyal, I’ll forgive your son’s damnable crime."
"So shall my virtue be his vice’s bawd; And he shall spend mine honour with his shame, As thriftless sons their scraping fathers’ gold. Or my shamed life in his dishonour lies: Thou kill’st me in his life; giving him breath, The traitor lives, the true man’s put to death.","So my virtue will pay for his vice, and as some bad sons spend all their fathers’ money, he’ll spend all my honor with his shame. My honor can only live if his dishonor dies, otherwise I will live in shame. By forgiving him you are killing me. If he lives, so does a traitor, and the loyal man is put to death."
"[Within] What ho, my liege! for God’s sake,","(speaking from off-stage) Hello, my lord! For God’s sake, let me in."
What shrill-voiced suppliant makes this eager cry?,What screeching beggar is there?
"A woman, and thy aunt, great king; ’tis I. Speak with me, pity me, open the door. A beggar begs that never begg’d before.","A woman and your aunt, great king. It’s me. Please pity me. Open the door and talk to me. I, who have never begged before, am now a beggar."
"And now changed to ‘The Beggar and the King.’ My dangerous cousin, let your mother in: I know she is come to pray for your foul sin.","Suddenly the scene has changed from something serious to “The Beggar and the King.” An old English ballad that was popular in Shakespeare’s time. “The Beggar and the King.” My dangerous cousin, let your mother in. I know that she’s come to beg forgiveness for your terrible crime."
"If thou do pardon, whosoever pray, This fester’d joint cut off, the rest rest sound; This let alone will all the rest confound.","No matter who prays, if you forgive this crime, only more will follow. By cutting off this infected limb you’ll keep the rest of the body healthy. It’s the only way to keep this sickness from spreading."
"O king, believe not this hard-hearted man! Love loving not itself none other can.","Oh, king, don’t believe this hardhearted man! If he can’t love his son, he is incapable of loving anyone."
Shall thy old dugs once more a traitor rear?,"You crazy woman, what are you doing here? Are you going to nurse another traitor with your old breasts?"
"Sweet York, be patient. Hear me, gentle liege.","Sweet York, be patient. Gentle king, listen to me."
"Rise up, good aunt.","Get up, good aunt."
"Not yet, I thee beseech: And never see day that the happy sees, Till thou give joy; until thou bid me joy, By pardoning Rutland, my transgressing boy.","Not yet, I beg you. I’ll stay on my knees and never look up again until you give me joy by forgiving Rutland, my wayward son."
Unto my mother’s prayers I bend my knee.,"I’ll kneel, too, in support of my mother’s prayers."
"Ill mayst thou thrive, if thou grant any grace!","I’ll kneel to oppose them. If you forgive him, you’ll only nurture more bad deeds."
"Pleads he in earnest? look upon his face; His eyes do drop no tears, his prayers are in jest; His words come from his mouth, ours from our breast: We pray with heart and soul and all beside: His weary joints would gladly rise, I know; Our knees shall kneel till to the ground they grow: His prayers are full of false hypocrisy; Our prayers do out-pray his; then let them have That mercy which true prayer ought to have.","Is he serious? Look at his face. He’s not crying. His prayers are a joke. His words come from his mouth, but ours come from our hearts. He prays softly, hoping to be denied. We pray with heart and soul and all our bodies. I know his old and tired knees would like to straighten up. We’ll stay kneeling till our knees grow roots in the ground. His prayers are hypocritical, while ours are full of true desire and integrity. Our prayers are more prayer-like than his, so let our prayers be rewarded as they ought to be, with mercy."
"Good aunt, stand up.","Good aunt, stand up."
"Nay, do not say, ‘stand up;’ And if I were thy nurse, thy tongue to teach, ‘Pardon’ should be the first word of thy speech. I never long’d to hear a word till now; Say ‘pardon,’ king; let pity teach thee how: No word like ‘pardon’ for kings’ mouths so meet.","No, don’t say, “Stand up.” First say, “I forgive,” and then you can tell me to stand up. If I were your nanny, the first word I would teach you would be “pardon.” I’ve never wanted to hear a word so badly. Say “pardon,” king. Let pity teach you how. The word is short and sweeter than it is short. It’s the most fitting word for a king to say."
"Speak it in French, king; say, ‘pardonne moi.’","Say it in French, king. Say, “Pardonne moi.” Excuse me.” “Pardonne moi.”"
"Dost thou teach pardon pardon to destroy? Ah, my sour husband, my hard-hearted lord, Speak ‘pardon’ as ’tis current in our land; The chopping French we do not understand. Thine eye begins to speak; set thy tongue there; Or in thy piteous heart plant thou thine ear; Pity may move thee ‘pardon’ to rehearse.","Do you try to destroy forgiveness by teaching that pardon? Oh, my sour husband, my hardhearted lord, you’d make that word the opposite of what it means. Say “pardon” in English. We don’t understand French. I can see it in your eyes, so let your tongue say it. Listen to the pity in your heart with your ears, which our laments and prayers pierce, so that pity may move you to say “pardon.”"
"Good aunt, stand up.","Good aunt, stand up."
I do not sue to stand; Pardon is all the suit I have in hand.,I’m not begging to stand. All I want is a pardon.
"I pardon him, as God shall pardon me.","I pardon him, as God will one day pardon me."
"O happy vantage of a kneeling knee! Yet am I sick for fear: speak it again; Twice saying ‘pardon’ doth not pardon twain, But makes one pardon strong.","Oh, the happy view from a bended knee! But I’m still fearful. Say it again. Saying it twice doesn’t divide your pardon and weaken it but makes the one pardon stronger."
I pardon him.,"With all my heart, I pardon him."
A god on earth thou art.,You are a god on earth.
"But for our trusty brother-in-law and the abbot, With all the rest of that consorted crew, Good uncle, help to order several powers To Oxford, or where’er these traitors are: They shall not live within this world, I swear, But I will have them, if I once know where. Your mother well hath pray’d, and prove you true.","But my trusted brother-in-law, the abbot, and all the rest of that group of conspirators must be destroyed. Good uncle, send several men to Oxford or wherever these traitors are hiding. I swear that as long as they are alive, I will find them and capture them. Uncle, goodbye, and goodbye cousin, too. Your mother has prayed well and proved your loyalty."
"Come, my old son: I pray God make thee new.","Come, my son. I’ll pray that God forces you to reform."
"Didst thou not mark the king, what words he spake, ‘Have I no friend will rid me of this living fear?’ Was it not so?",Didn’t you notice the king and hear what he said? “Don’t I have any friends who will rid me of this constant fear?” Didn’t he say that?
These were his very words.,Those were his exact words.
"And urged it twice together, did he not?","Twice he said, “Don’t I have any friends?” didn’t he?"
He did.,He did.
"And speaking it, he wistly look’d on me, And who should say, ‘I would thou wert the man’ Meaning the king at Pomfret. Come, let’s go: I am the king’s friend, and will rid his foe.","And when he said it, he looked at me intently, as if he were saying, “I wish you were the man who would take this fear away from me.” He means the king at Pomfret. Come, let’s go. I am the king’s friend, and I’ll get rid him of his enemy."
"I have been studying how I may compare This prison where I live unto the world: And for because the world is populous And here is not a creature but myself, My brain I’ll prove the female to my soul, My soul the father; and these two beget A generation of still-breeding thoughts, And these same thoughts people this little world, For no thought is contented. The better sort, As thoughts of things divine, are intermix’d With scruples and do set the word itself Against the word: ‘It is as hard to come as for a camel To thread the postern of a small needle’s eye.’ Thoughts tending to ambition, they do plot Unlikely wonders; how these vain weak nails Of this hard world, my ragged prison walls, And, for they cannot, die in their own pride. Thoughts tending to content flatter themselves That they are not the first of fortune’s slaves, Who sitting in the stocks refuge their shame, That many have and others must sit there; And in this thought they find a kind of ease, Bearing their own misfortunes on the back Thus play I in one person many people, And none contented: sometimes am I king; Then treasons make me wish myself a beggar, And so I am: then crushing penury Then am I king’d again: and by and by Think that I am unking’d by Bolingbroke, And straight am nothing: but whate’er I be, Nor I nor any man that but man is With being nothing. Music do I hear?","I have been thinking about how I might compare this prison I live in to the world. But because the world is full of people and I’m the only one here, I cannot do it. Yet I’ll work it out. My brain and my soul will produce enough thoughts to fill this little world, like people in the outside world and just as discontented. The better kind of thought, like the thought of divine things, is mixed with doubts and compares passages from scripture, like “Come, little ones” and “It is as hard for a rich man to enter heaven as for a camel to pass through a needle’s eye.” Both passages involve the ease—or difficulty—of reaching heaven. “Come, little ones” and “It is as hard for a rich man to enter heaven as for a camel to pass through a needle’s eye.” Ambitious thoughts plot unlikely miracles, such as digging through the walls of my cell by hand, and these thoughts die in their prime because they are futile. Contented thoughts tell themselves that they aren’t the first to be a slave to fortune, and they won’t be the last. They’re like beggars in the stocks who take comfort in the fact that others have already sat there and more will sit there. So I host many people inside my own head, and none are content. Sometimes I’m king, and then some treason makes me wish I was a beggar, and so then I am a beggar. Then terrible poverty persuades me that I was better off as king, so then I am king again. And then I think that I have been dethroned by Bolingbroke, and suddenly I’m nothing. But whatever I am, just like all men, I’ll never be happy until I am dead and nothing at all. Do I hear music?"
"Ha, ha! keep time: how sour sweet music is, When time is broke and no proportion kept! So is it in the music of men’s lives. To cheque time broke in a disorder’d string; But for the concord of my state and time Had not an ear to hear my true time broke. I wasted time, and now doth time waste me; My thoughts are minutes; and with sighs they jar Their watches on unto mine eyes, the outward watch, Whereto my finger, like a dial’s point, Is pointing still, in cleansing them from tears. Are clamorous groans, which strike upon my heart, Which is the bell: so sighs and tears and groans Show minutes, times, and hours: but my time Runs posting on in Bolingbroke’s proud joy, This music mads me; let it sound no more; For though it have holp madmen to their wits, In me it seems it will make wise men mad. Yet blessing on his heart that gives it me! Is a strange brooch in this all-hating world.","Ha! Keep time. How awful music is when they don’t keep time and the notes’ proportions are ruined. It’s the same thing in men’s lives. And here I can chastise the poor time kept on an out-of-tune instrument, when in the harmony of my government and life I couldn’t hear my own time breaking. I wasted time then, and now time wastes me. Time has made me his clock: my thoughts have become minutes that turn the clock hands in my eyes, and my finger is the dial that wipes away my tears. Now, sir, my groans are like the sounds that toll the hours, and they’re made by striking my heart, which is the bell. Thus my sighs, tears, and groans signify minutes and hours. Meanwhile, my time speeds on as Bolingbroke has his joy, and I’m left here playing the clock for him. This music makes me crazy. Let it stop. It might make madmen sane, but for me, it makes a wise man mad. Yet bless the heart that plays it for me! It’s a sign of love, and I am seldom given love in this hateful world."
"Hail, royal prince!","Hello, royal prince!"
"Thanks, noble peer; The cheapest of us is ten groats too dear. Where no man never comes but that sad dog That brings me food to make misfortune live?","Thanks, my noble peer. You overvalue me, for we are equals and worth the same. Who are you, and how have you come here? My only visitor is that man who keeps my misfortune alive by bringing me food."
"I was a poor groom of thy stable, king, When thou wert king; who, travelling towards York, To look upon my sometimes royal master’s face. O, how it yearn’d my heart when I beheld In London streets, that coronation-day, When Bolingbroke rode on roan Barbary, That horse that I so carefully have dress’d!","I was a poor groom in your stable, king, when you were king. I was traveling toward York, and after a great deal of trouble I got permission to see my former master’s face. Oh, how it saddened me when I saw Bolingbroke ride into London that coronation day on Barbary, the horse you’ve ridden so often and which I’d so often made ready for you!"
"Rode he on Barbary? Tell me, gentle friend, How went he under him?","Did he ride on Barbary? Tell me, dear friend, how did the horse do?"
So proudly as if he disdain’d the ground.,He pranced as proudly as if he scorned the earth.
"That jade hath eat bread from my royal hand; This hand hath made him proud with clapping him. Would he not stumble? would he not fall down, Since pride must have a fall, and break the neck Forgiveness, horse! why do I rail on thee, Since thou, created to be awed by man, Wast born to bear? I was not made a horse; And yet I bear a burthen like an ass,","So proud to have Bolingbroke on his back! He had eaten bread from my hand, and I made him proud by patting his neck. Shouldn’t he stumble? Shouldn’t he fall down and break the neck of the man that stole my throne? I forgive you, horse! Why should I curse you, since you were created to fear man and carry him. I was not made like a horse, but I carry a burden like a donkey, and I’m kicked and exhausted from carrying rough-riding Bolingbroke."
"Fellow, give place; here is no longer stay.","Fellow, go away. You can’t stay any longer."
"If thou love me, ’tis time thou wert away.","If you love me, you should go."
"What my tongue dares not, that my heart shall say.",I don’t dare say what my heart feels.
"My lord, will’t please you to fall to?","My lord, will you eat?"
"Taste of it first, as thou art wont to do.","Taste it first, as you usually do."
"My lord, I dare not: Sir Pierce of Exton, who lately came from the king, commands the contrary.","My lord, I don’t dare. Sir Pierce of Exton, who just arrived from the king, ordered me not to."
"The devil take Henry of Lancaster and thee! Patience is stale, and I am weary of it.",May the devil take Henry of Lancaster and you! I am tired of being patient.
"Help, help, help!","Help, help, help!"
"How now! what means death in this rude assault? Villain, thy own hand yields thy death’s instrument.","Do you mean to kill me in this despicable assault? Villain, I’ll kill you with your own weapon."
"Go thou, and fill another room in hell.",Go to hell.
"That hand shall burn in never-quenching fire Hath with the king’s blood stain’d the king’s own land. Mount, mount, my soul! thy seat is up on high; Whilst my gross flesh sinks downward, here to die.","You’ll burn in hell forever for killing me. Exton, you’ve stained the king’s land with the king’s own blood. Arise my soul! Your place is in heaven, while my body sinks down and dies."
"As full of valour as of royal blood: For now the devil, that told me I did well, Says that this deed is chronicled in hell. This dead king to the living king I’ll bear Take hence the rest, and give them burial here.","He is as full of courage as of royal blood, which I’ve spilled here. I wish the deed were good! The devil, who told me that I did well, tells me now that I’ll go to hell. I’ll take this dead king to the living king and bury the others here."
"Kind uncle York, the latest news we hear Is that the rebels have consumed with fire Our town of Cicester in Gloucestershire; But whether they be ta’en or slain we hear not.","Kind uncle York, the last news I heard is that the rebels have burned down the town of Cirencester in Gloucestershire. But I haven’t heard if they’ve been captured or killed."
"Welcome, my lord what is the news?","Welcome, my lord. What’s the news?"
"First, to thy sacred state wish I all happiness. The next news is, I have to London sent The heads of Oxford, Salisbury, Blunt, and Kent: The manner of their taking may appear","First, I wish you happiness. Next, I’ve sent the heads of Oxford, Salisbury, Blunt, and Kent to London. This paper tells how they were taken."
"We thank thee, gentle Percy, for thy pains; And to thy worth will add right worthy gains.","I thank you, gentle Percy, for your effort. I’ll reward you well, as you deserve."
"My lord, I have from Oxford sent to London The heads of Brocas and Sir Bennet Seely, That sought at Oxford thy dire overthrow.","My lord, I’ve sent the heads of Brocas and Sir Bennet Seely from Oxford to London. They were two of the traitors who wanted to overthrow you at Oxford."
"Thy pains, Fitzwater, shall not be forgot; Right noble is thy merit, well I wot.","I won’t forget your efforts, Fitzwater. I know that you deserve your noble title."
"The grand conspirator, Abbot of Westminster, Hath yielded up his body to the grave; But here is Carlisle living, to abide Thy kingly doom and sentence of his pride.","The Abbot of Westminster, who conspired against you, has died. But here is Carlisle, alive, to hear your judgment on him."
"Carlisle, this is your doom: More than thou hast, and with it joy thy life; So as thou livest in peace, die free from strife: For though mine enemy thou hast ever been, High sparks of honour in thee have I seen.","Carlisle, here is your sentence: pick some secret place where you can live out your life in peace and die without violence. Even though you’ve always been my enemy, I’ve seen that you are a man of great honor."
"Thy buried fear: herein all breathless lies The mightiest of thy greatest enemies, Richard of Bordeaux, by me hither brought.","Great king, here is your greatest fear now buried inside this coffin. In it lies without breathing your greatest enemy, Richard of Bordeaux, brought here by me."
"Exton, I thank thee not; for thou hast wrought Upon my head and all this famous land.","Exton, I don’t thank you. By killing him, you’ve done a disgrace to my name and to our country."
"From your own mouth, my lord, did I this deed.",I did this on your own command.
"They love not poison that do poison need, Nor do I thee: though I did wish him dead, The guilt of conscience take thou for thy labour, But neither my good word nor princely favour: With Cain go wander through shades of night, And never show thy head by day nor light.","Those who need to poison someone still don’t love poison. Even though I wanted him dead, I hate the man who murdered him, and now I love the man who has been murdered. You can take your guilty conscience as payment. I won’t give you any praise or royal favors. Go wander the night like Cain In the Book of Genesis, Cain kills his brother, Abel, and, as punishment, God orders him to wander the earth for the rest of his life. Cain is considered the world’s first murderer. Cain , and don’t show your face here again."
"That blood should sprinkle me to make me grow: Come, mourn with me for that I do lament, And put on sullen black incontinent: I’ll make a voyage to the Holy Land, March sadly after; grace my mournings here; In weeping after this untimely bier.","Lords, I protest. My soul is full of sorrow that blood has been shed to make me more secure. Come, mourn with me and dress yourselves in black immediately. I’ll travel to the Holy Land to wash away this blood from my guilty hands. March sadly behind me, and weep for this untimely death."
