"Two households, both alike in dignity (In fair Verona, where we lay our scene), From ancient grudge break to new mutiny, Where civil blood makes civil hands unclean. A pair of star-crossed lovers take their life, Whose misadventured piteous overthrows Doth with their death bury their parents' strife. The fearful passage of their death-marked love Which, but their children’s end, naught could remove, Is now the two hours' traffic of our stage— The which, if you with patient ears attend, What here shall miss, our toil shall strive to mend.","In the beautiful city of Verona, where our story takes place, a long-standing hatred between two families erupts into new violence, and citizens stain their hands with the blood of their fellow citizens. Two unlucky children of these enemy families become lovers and commit suicide. Their unfortunate deaths put an end to their parents' feud. For the next two hours, we will watch the story of their doomed love and their parents' anger, which nothing but the children’s deaths could stop. If you listen to us patiently, we’ll make up for everything we’ve left out in this prologue onstage."
"Gregory, on my word, we’ll not carry coals.","Gregory, I swear, we can’t let them humiliate us. We won’t take their garbage."
"No, for then we should be colliers.","(teasing SAMPSON) No, because then we’d be garbagemen."
"I mean, an we be in choler, we’ll draw.","What I mean is, if they make us angry we’ll pull out our swords."
"Ay, while you live, draw your neck out of collar.","Maybe you should focus on pulling yourself out of trouble, Sampson."
"I strike quickly, being moved.",I hit hard when I’m angry.
But thou art not quickly moved to strike.,But it’s hard to make you angry Gregory continually implies that Sampson isn’t as tough as he’s acting. angry .
A dog of the house of Montague moves me.,One of those dogs from the Montague house can make me angry.
"To move is to stir, and to be valiant is to stand. Therefore if thou art moved thou runn’st away.",Angry enough to run away. You won’t stand and fight.
A dog of that house shall move me to stand. I will take the wall of any man or maid of Montague’s.,"A dog from that house will make me angry enough to take a stand. If I pass one of them on the street, I’ll take the side closer to the wall and let him walk in the gutter."
"That shows thee a weak slave, for the weakest goes to the wall.","That means you’re the weak one, because weaklings get pushed up against the wall."
"'Tis true, and therefore women, being the weaker vessels, are ever thrust to the wall. Therefore I will push Montague’s men from the wall, and thrust his maids to the wall.",You’re right. That’s why girls get pushed up against walls—they’re weak. So what I’ll do is push the Montague men into the street and the Montague women up against the wall.
The quarrel is between our masters and us their men.,"The fight is between our masters, and we men who work for them."
"'Tis all one. I will show myself a tyrant. When I have fought with the men, I will be civil with the maids. I will cut off their heads.","It’s all the same. I’ll be a harsh master to them. After I fight the men, I’ll be nice to the women—I’ll cut off their heads."
The heads of the maids?,Cut off their heads? You mean their maidenheads “Maidenhead” = virginity. maidenheads ?
"Ay, the heads of the maids, or their maidenheads. Take it in what sense thou wilt.","Cut off their heads, take their maidenheads—whatever. Take my remark in whichever sense you like."
They must take it in sense that feel it.,The women you rape are the ones who’ll have to “sense” it.
"Me they shall feel while I am able to stand, and ’tis known I am a pretty piece of flesh.",They’ll feel me as long as I can keep an erection. Everybody knows I’m a nice piece of flesh.
"'Tis well thou art not fish. If thou hadst, thou hadst been poor-john.",It’s a good thing you’re not a piece of fish. You’re dried and shriveled They are joking about Sampson’s private parts. dried and shriveled like salted fish. 
Draw thy tool! Here comes of the house of Montagues.,Pull out your tool now. These guys are from the house of Montague.
My naked weapon is out. Quarrel! I will back thee.,"I have my naked sword out. Fight, I’ll back you up."
How? Turn thy back and run?,How will you back me up—by turning your back and running away?
Fear me not.,Don’t worry about me.
"No, marry. I fear thee.","No, really. I am worried about you!"
Let us take the law of our sides. Let them begin.,Let’s not break the law by starting a fight. Let them start something.
"I will frown as I pass by, and let them take it as they list.","I’ll frown at them as they pass by, and they can react however they want."
"Nay, as they dare. I will bite my thumb at them, which is a disgrace to them, if they bear it. (bites his thumb)","You mean however they dare. I’ll bite my thumb at them. That’s an insult, and if they let me get away with it they’ll be dishonored. (SAMPSON bites his thumb Biting the thumb is a gesture of disrespect. bites his thumb )"
"Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?","Hey, are you biting your thumb at us?"
"I do bite my thumb, sir.",I’m biting my thumb.
"Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?",Are you biting your thumb at us?
Is the law of our side if I say “ay”?,(aside to GREGORY) Is the law on our side if I say yes?
(aside to SAMPSON) No.,(aside to SAMPSON) No.
"No, sir. I do not bite my thumb at you, sir, but I bite my thumb, sir.","(to ABRAM) No, sir, I’m not biting my thumb at you, but I am biting my thumb."
"Do you quarrel, sir?",Are you trying to start a fight?
"Quarrel, sir? No, sir.","Start a fight? No, sir."
"But if you do, sir, I am for you. I serve as good a man as you.","If you want to fight, I’m your man. My employer is as good as yours."
No better.,But he’s not better than mine.
"Well, sir.",Well then.
(aside to SAMPSON) Say “better.” Here comes one of my master’s kinsmen.,(speaking so that only SAMPSON can hear) Say “better.” Here comes one of my employer’s relatives.
"(to ABRAM) Yes, better, sir.","(to ABRAM) Yes, “better,” sir."
You lie.,You lie.
"Draw, if you be men.—Gregory, remember thy washing blow.","Pull out your swords, if you’re men. Gregory, remember how to slash."
"(draws his sword) Part, fools!","(pulling out his sword) Break it up, you fools. Put your swords away. You don’t know what you’re doing."
"What, art thou drawn among these heartless hinds? Turn thee, Benvolio. Look upon thy death.","What? You’ve pulled out your sword to fight with these worthless servants? Turn around, Benvolio, and look at the man who’s going to kill you."
"I do but keep the peace. Put up thy sword, Or manage it to part these men with me.",I’m only trying to keep the peace. Either put away your sword or use it to help me stop this fight.
"As I hate hell, all Montagues, and thee. Have at thee, coward!","What? You take out your sword and then talk about peace? I hate the word peace like I hate hell, all Montagues, and you. Let’s go at it, coward!"
"Clubs, bills, and partisans! Strike! Beat them down! Down with the Capulets! Down with the Montagues!",Use your clubs and spears! Hit them! Beat them down! Down with the Capulets! Down with the Montagues!
"What noise is this? Give me my long sword, ho!",What’s this noise? Give me my long sword! Come on!
"A crutch, a crutch! Why call you for a sword?","A crutch, you need a crutch—why are you asking for a sword?"
"My sword, I say! Old Montague is come, And flourishes his blade in spite of me.","I want my sword. Old Montague is here, and he’s waving his sword around just to make me mad."
Thou villain Capulet! Hold me not. Let me go.,"Capulet, you villain! (his wife holds him back) Don’t stop me. Let me go."
Thou shalt not stir one foot to seek a foe.,You’re not taking one step toward an enemy.
"Rebellious subjects, enemies to peace, Profaners of this neighbor-stainèd steel!— Will they not hear?—What, ho! You men, you beasts, That quench the fire of your pernicious rage On pain of torture, from those bloody hands Throw your mistempered weapons to the ground, And hear the sentence of your movèd prince. Three civil brawls, bred of an airy word, Have thrice disturbed the quiet of our streets And made Verona’s ancient citizens Cast by their grave-beseeming ornaments, To wield old partisans in hands as old, If ever you disturb our streets again, Your lives shall pay the forfeit of the peace. For this time, all the rest depart away. You, Capulet, shall go along with me, To know our farther pleasure in this case, To old Free-town, our common judgment-place. Once more, on pain of death, all men depart.","(shouting at the rioters) You rebels! Enemies of the peace! Men who turn their weapons against their own neighbors—They won’t listen to me?—You there! You men, you beasts, who satisfy your anger with fountains of each others' blood! I’ll have you tortured if you don’t put down your swords and listen to your angry prince. (MONTAGUE, CAPULET, and their followers throw down their weapons) Three times now riots have broken out in this city, all because of a casual word from you, old Capulet and Montague. Three times the peace has been disturbed in our streets, and Verona’s old citizens have had to take off their dress clothes and pick up rusty old spears to part you. If you ever cause a disturbance on our streets again, you’ll pay for it with your lives. Everyone else, go away for now. (to CAPULET) You, Capulet, come with me. (to MONTAGUE) Montague, this afternoon come to old Free-town, the court where I deliver judgments, and I’ll tell you what else I want from you. As for the rest of you, I’ll say this once more: go away or be put to death."
Who set this ancient quarrel new abroach?,"Who started this old fight up again? Speak, nephew. Were you here when it started?"
"Here were the servants of your adversary, And yours, close fighting ere I did approach. I drew to part them. In the instant came The fiery Tybalt, with his sword prepared, He swung about his head and cut the winds, Who, nothing hurt withal, hissed him in scorn. While we were interchanging thrusts and blows, Came more and more and fought on part and part,","Your servants were fighting your enemy’s servants before I got here. I drew my sword to part them. Right then, that hothead Tybalt showed up with his sword ready. He taunted me and waved his sword around, making the air hiss. As we were trading blows, more and more people showed up to join the fight, until the Prince came and broke everyone up."
"Oh, where is Romeo? Saw you him today? Right glad I am he was not at this fray.","Oh, where’s Romeo? Have you seen him today? I’m glad he wasn’t here for this fight."
"Madam, an hour before the worshipped sun Peered forth the golden window of the east, Where, underneath the grove of sycamore That westward rooteth from this city side, So early walking did I see your son. Towards him I made, but he was 'ware of me I, measuring his affections by my own, Which then most sought where most might not be found, Being one too many by my weary self, Pursued my humor not pursuing his,","Madam, I had a lot on my mind an hour before dawn this morning, so I went for a walk. Underneath the Sycamore grove that grows on the west side of the city, I saw your son taking an early-morning walk. I headed toward him, but he saw me coming and hid in the woods. I thought he must be feeling the same way I was—wanting to be alone and tired of his own company. I figured he was avoiding me, and I was perfectly happy to leave him alone and keep to myself."
"Many a morning hath he there been seen, With tears augmenting the fresh morning’s dew, Adding to clouds more clouds with his deep sighs. But all so soon as the all-cheering sun The shady curtains from Aurora’s bed, Away from light steals home my heavy son,","He’s been seen there many mornings, crying tears that add drops to the morning dew and making a cloudy day cloudier with his sighs. But as soon as the sun rises in the east, my sad son comes home to escape the light."
"And private in his chamber pens himself, Shuts up his windows, locks fair daylight out, Black and portentous must this humor prove Unless good counsel may the cause remove.","He locks himself up alone in his bedroom, shuts his windows to keep out the beautiful daylight, and makes himself an artificial night. This mood of his is going to bring bad news, unless someone smart can fix what’s bothering him."
"My noble uncle, do you know the cause?","My noble uncle, do you know why he acts this way?"
I neither know it nor can learn of him.,"I don’t know, and he won’t tell me."
Have you importuned him by any means?,Have you done everything you could to make him tell you the reason?
"Both by myself and many other friends. But he, his own affections' counselor, Is to himself—I will not say how true, But to himself so secret and so close, As is the bud bit with an envious worm, Ere he can spread his sweet leaves to the air, Or dedicate his beauty to the same. Could we but learn from whence his sorrows grow.","I’ve tried, and many of our friends have tried to make him talk, but he keeps his thoughts to himself. He doesn’t want any friend but himself, and though I don’t know whether he’s a good friend to himself, he certainly keeps his own secrets. He’s like a flower bud that won’t open itself up to the world because it’s been poisoned from within by parasites. If we could only find out why he’s sad, we’d be as eager to help him as we were to learn the reason for his sadness."
"See, where he comes. So please you, step aside. I’ll know his grievance or be much denied.","Look—here he comes. If you don’t mind, please step aside. He’ll either have to tell me what’s wrong or else tell me no over and over."
"I would thou wert so happy by thy stay To hear true shrift.—Come, madam, let’s away.","I hope you’re lucky enough to hear the true story by sticking around. (to his wife) Come, madam, let’s go."
"Good morrow, cousin.","Good morning, cousin."
Is the day so young?,Is it that early in the day?
But new struck nine.,It’s only just now nine o'clock.
Ay me! Sad hours seem long. Was that my father that went hence so fast?,"Oh my, time goes by slowly when you’re sad. Was that my father who left here in such a hurry?"
It was. What sadness lengthens Romeo’s hours?,It was. What’s making you so sad and your hours so long?
"Not having that which, having, makes them short.",I don’t have the thing that makes time fly.
In love?,You’re in love?
Out.,Out.
Of love?,Out of love?
"Out of her favor, where I am in love.",I love someone. She doesn’t love me.
"Alas, that love, so gentle in his view,","It’s sad. Love looks like a nice thing, but it’s actually very rough when you experience it."
"Alas, that love, whose view is muffled still, Should, without eyes, see pathways to his will! Where shall we dine?—O me! What fray was here? Yet tell me not, for I have heard it all. Why then, O brawling love, O loving hate, O anything of nothing first created! O heavy lightness, serious vanity, Misshapen chaos of well-seeming forms! Still-waking sleep, that is not what it is! This love feel I, that feel no love in this. Dost thou not laugh?","What’s sad is that love is supposed to be blind, but it can still make you do whatever it wants. So, where should we eat? (seeing blood) Oh my! What fight happened here? No, don’t tell me—I know all about it. This fight has a lot to do with hatred, but it has more to do with love. O brawling love! O loving hate! Love that comes from nothing! Sad happiness! Serious foolishness! Beautiful things muddled together into an ugly mess! Love is heavy and light, bright and dark, hot and cold, sick and healthy, asleep and awake—it’s everything except what it is! This is the love I feel, though no one loves me back. Are you laughing?"
"No, coz, I rather weep.","No, cousin, I’m crying."
"Good heart, at what?","Good man, why are you crying?"
At thy good heart’s oppression.,I’m crying because of how sad you are.
"Why, such is love’s transgression. Griefs of mine own lie heavy in my breast, Which thou wilt propagate, to have it pressed With more of thine. This love that thou hast shown Love is a smoke raised with the fume of sighs; Being purged, a fire sparkling in lovers' eyes; Being vexed, a sea nourished with loving tears. What is it else? A madness most discreet, Farewell, my coz.","Yes, this is what love does. My sadness sits heavy in my chest, and you want to add your own sadness to mine so there’s even more. I have too much sadness already, and now you’re going to make me sadder by feeling sorry for you. Here’s what love is: a smoke made out of lovers' sighs. When the smoke clears, love is a fire burning in your lover’s eyes. If you frustrate love, you get an ocean made out of lovers' tears. What else is love? It’s a wise form of madness. It’s a sweet lozenge that you choke on. Goodbye, cousin."
"Soft! I will go along. And if you leave me so, you do me wrong.","Wait. I’ll come with you. If you leave me like this, you’re doing me wrong."
"Tut, I have lost myself. I am not here. This is not Romeo. He’s some other where.",I’m not myself. I’m not here. This isn’t Romeo—he’s somewhere else.
"Tell me in sadness, who is that you love.","Tell me seriously, who is the one you love?"
"What, shall I groan and tell thee?",Seriously? You mean I should groan and tell you?
"Groan! Why, no. But sadly, tell me who.",Groan? No. But tell me seriously who it is.
"A sick man in sadness makes his will, A word ill urged to one that is so ill.","You wouldn’t tell a sick man he “seriously” has to make his will—it would just make him worse. Seriously, cousin, I love a woman."
I aimed so near when I supposed you loved.,I guessed that already when I guessed you were in love.
A right good markman! And she’s fair I love.,Then you were right on target. The woman I love is beautiful.
"A right fair mark, fair coz, is soonest hit.",A beautiful target is the one that gets hit the fastest.
"Well, in that hit you miss. She’ll not be hit And, in strong proof of chastity well armed From love’s weak childish bow, she lives uncharmed. She will not stay the siege of loving terms, Nor bide th' encounter of assailing eyes, Oh, she is rich in beauty, only poor That when she dies, with beauty dies her store.","Well, you’re not on target there. She refuses to be hit by Cupid’s Cupid, the Roman god of love, shoots arrows at humans that make them fall in love. Diana is the Roman goddess of virginity and hunting. Cupid’s arrow. She’s as clever as Diana, and shielded by the armor of chastity. She can’t be touched by the weak and childish arrows of love. She won’t listen to words of love, or let you look at her with loving eyes, or open her lap to receive gifts of gold. She’s rich in beauty, but she’s also poor, because when she dies her beauty will be destroyed with her."
Then she hath sworn that she will still live chaste?,So she’s made a vow to be a virgin forever?
"She hath, and in that sparing makes huge waste, Cuts beauty off from all posterity. She is too fair, too wise, wisely too fair, To merit bliss by making me despair. She hath forsworn to love, and in that vow","Yes she has, and by keeping celibate, she wastes her beauty. If you starve yourself of sex you can’t ever have children, and so your beauty is lost to future generations. She’s too beautiful and too wise to deserve heaven’s blessing by making me despair. She’s sworn off love, and that promise has left me alive but dead, living only to talk about it now."
Be ruled by me. Forget to think of her.,Take my advice. Don’t think about her.
"O, teach me how I should forget to think!",Teach me to forget to think!
By giving liberty unto thine eyes. Examine other beauties.,Do it by letting your eyes wander freely. Look at other beautiful girls.
"'Tis the way These happy masks that kiss fair ladies' brows, Being black, puts us in mind they hide the fair. He that is strucken blind cannot forget The precious treasure of his eyesight lost. What doth her beauty serve but as a note Where I may read who passed that passing fair? Farewell. Thou canst not teach me to forget.",That will only make me think more about how beautiful she is. Beautiful women like to wear black masks over their faces—those black masks only make us think about how beautiful they are underneath. A man who goes blind can’t forget the precious eyesight he lost. Show me a really beautiful girl. Her beauty is like a note telling me where I can see someone even more beautiful. Goodbye. You can’t teach me to forget.
I’ll pay that doctrine or else die in debt.,"I’ll show you how to forget, or else I’ll die owing you that lesson."
"But Montague is bound as well as I, In penalty alike. And ’tis not hard, I think, For men so old as we to keep the peace.","(continuing a conversation) But Montague has sworn an oath just like I have, and he’s under the same penalty. I don’t think it will be hard for men as old as we are to keep the peace."
"Of honorable reckoning are you both. But now, my lord, what say you to my suit?","You both have honorable reputations, and it’s too bad you’ve been enemies for so long. But what do you say to my request?"
But saying o'er what I have said before. My child is yet a stranger in the world. She hath not seen the change of fourteen years. Ere we may think her ripe to be a bride.,I can only repeat what I’ve said before. My daughter is still very young. She’s not even fourteen years old. Let’s wait two more summers before we start thinking she’s ready to get married.
Younger than she are happy mothers made.,Girls younger than she often marry and become happy mothers.
"And too soon marred are those so early made. Earth hath swallowed all my hopes but she. But woo her, gentle Paris, get her heart. My will to her consent is but a part. An she agreed within her scope of choice, Lies my consent and fair according voice. Whereto I have invited many a guest Such as I love. And you among the store, One more, most welcome, makes my number more. At my poor house look to behold this night","Girls who marry so young grow up too soon. But go ahead and charm her, gentle Paris; make her love you. My permission is only part of her decision. If she agrees to marry you, my blessing and fair words will confirm her choice. Tonight I’m having a feast that we’ve celebrated for many years. I’ve invited many of my closest friends, and I’d like to welcome you and add you to the guest list. At my humble house tonight, you can expect to see dazzling stars that walk on the ground and light the sky from below."
"Such comfort as do lusty young men feel When well-appareled April on the heel Of limping winter treads. Even such delight Among fresh fennel buds shall you this night And like her most whose merit most shall be— Which on more view of many, mine, being one, May stand in number, though in reckoning none, Come, go with me.","You’ll be delighted by young women as fresh as spring flowers. Look at anyone you like, and choose whatever woman seems best to you. Once you see a lot of girls, you might not think my daughter’s the best anymore. Come along with me."
"Go, sirrah, trudge about Through fair Verona. Find those persons out Whose names are written there, and to them say My house and welcome on their pleasure stay.","(to PETER, handing him a paper) Go, little fellow, walk all around Verona. Find the people on this list and tell them they’re welcome at my house tonight."
"Find them out whose names are written here? It is written, that the shoemaker should meddle with his yard and the tailor with his last, the fisher with his pencil and the painter with his nets. But I am sent to find those persons whose names are here writ, and can never find what names the writing person hath here writ. I must to the learned in good time!","Find the people whose names are on this list? It is written that shoemakers and tailors should play with each others' tools, that fisherman should play with paints, and painters should play with with fishing nets. But I’ve been sent to find the people whose names are written on this list, and I can’t read! I’ll never find them on my own. I’ve got to find somebody who knows how to read to help me. But here come some people, right in the nick of time."
"One pain is lessened by another’s anguish. Turn giddy, and be helped by backward turning. One desperate grief cures with another’s languish. Take thou some new infection to thy eye,","(to ROMEO) Come on, man. You can put out one fire by starting another. A new pain will make the one you already have seem less. If you make yourself dizzy, you can cure yourself by spinning back around in the opposite direction. A new grief will put the old one out of your mind. Make yourself lovesick by gazing at some new girl, and your old lovesickness will be cured."
Your plantain leaf is excellent for that.,The plantain The plantain leaf was thought to have healing powers. plantain leaf is excellent for that.
"For what, I pray thee?","For what, Romeo?"
For your broken shin.,For when you cut your shin.
"Why Romeo, art thou mad?","What? Romeo, are you crazy?"
"Shut up in prison, kept without my food, Whipped and tormented and—Good e'en, good fellow.","I’m not crazy, but I’m tied up tighter than a mental patient in a straitjacket. I’m locked up in a prison and deprived of food. I’m whipped and tortured—(to PETER) Good evening, good fellow."
"God 'i' good e'en. I pray, sir, can you read?","May God give you a good evening. Excuse me, sir, do you know how to read?"
"Ay, mine own fortune in my misery.",I can read my own fortune in my misery.
"Perhaps you have learned it without book. But I pray, can you read anything you see?","Perhaps you’ve learned from life and not from books. But please tell me, can you read anything you see?"
"Ay, if I know the letters and the language.","Yes, if I know the language and the letters."
Ye say honestly. Rest you merry.,"I see. Well, that’s an honest answer Peter assumes Romeo means he does not know his letters. honest answer . Have a nice day."
"Stay, fellow. I can read. (he reads the letter) County Anselme and his beauteous sisters; The lady widow of Vitruvio; Seigneur Placentio and his lovely nieces; Mercutio and his brother Valentine; My fair niece Rosaline and Livia;","Stay, fellow. I can read. (he reads the letter) “Signor Martino and his wife and daughters, Count Anselme and his beautiful sisters, Vitruvio’s widow, Signor Placentio and his lovely nieces, Mercutio and his brother Valentine, My uncle Capulet and his wife and daughters, My fair niece Rosaline and Livia,"
Seigneur Valentio and his cousin Tybalt; Lucio and the lively Helena.” A fair assembly. Whither should they come?,"Signor Valentio and his cousin Tybalt, Lucio and the lively Helena.” That’s a nice group of people. Where are they supposed to come?"
Up.,Up.
Whither? To supper?,Where? To supper?
To our house.,To our house.
Whose house?,Whose house?
My master’s.,My master’s house.
"Indeed, I should have asked thee that before.","Indeed, I should have asked you before who he was."
"Now I’ll tell you without asking. My master is the great rich Capulet, and if you be not of the house of Montagues, I pray come and crush a cup of wine. Rest you merry!","Now I’ll tell you so you don’t have to ask. My master is the great and rich Capulet, and if you don’t belong to the house of Montague, please come and drink a cup of wine. Have a nice day!"
"At this same ancient feast of Capulet’s With all the admired beauties of Verona. Go thither, and with unattainted eye Compare her face with some that I shall show, And I will make thee think thy swan a crow.","The beautiful Rosaline whom you love so much will be at Capulet’s traditional feast, along with every beautiful woman in Verona. Go there and compare her objectively to some other girls I’ll show you. The woman who you think is as beautiful as a swan is going to look as ugly as a crow to you."
"Maintains such falsehood, then turn tears to fires, And these, who, often drowned, could never die, Transparent heretics, be burnt for liars! One fairer than my love? The all-seeing sun","If my eyes ever lie to me like that, let my tears turn into flames and burn them for being such obvious liars! A woman more beautiful than the one I love? The sun itself has never seen anyone as beautiful since the world began."
"Tut, you saw her fair, none else being by, Herself poised with herself in either eye. But in that crystal scales let there be weighed Your lady’s love against some other maid And she shall scant show well that now shows best.","Come on, you first decided she was beautiful when no one else was around. There was no one to compare her to except herself. But let your eyes compare her to another beautiful woman who I’ll show you at this feast, and you won’t think she’s the best anymore."
"I’ll go along, no such sight to be shown, But to rejoice in splendor of mine own.","I’ll go with you. Not because I think you’ll show me anything better, but so I can see the woman I love."
"Nurse, where’s my daughter? Call her forth to me.","Nurse, where’s my daughter? Tell her to come to me."
"Now, by my maidenhead at twelve year old I bade her come. What, lamb! What, ladybird! God forbid! Where’s this girl? What, Juliet!","I swear to you by my virginity at age twelve, I already told her to come. Come on! Where is she? What is she doing? What, Juliet!"
"How now, who calls?",What is it? Who’s calling me?
Your mother.,Your mother.
"Madam, I am here. What is your will?","Madam, I’m here. What do you want?"
"This is the matter.—Nurse, give leave awhile, We must talk in secret.—Nurse, come back again. Thou know’st my daughter’s of a pretty age.","I’ll tell you what’s the matter—Nurse, leave us alone for a little while. We must talk privately—Nurse, come back here. I just remembered, you can listen to our secrets. You know how young my daughter is."
"Faith, I can tell her age unto an hour.","Yes, I know her age down to the hour."
She’s not fourteen.,She’s not even fourteen.
"I’ll lay fourteen of my teeth—and yet, to my teen be it spoken, I have but four—she is not fourteen. How long is it now to Lammastide?","I’d bet fourteen of my own teeth—but, I’m sorry to say, I only have four teeth—she’s not fourteen. How long is it until Lammastide Lammastide = August . Lammastide ?"
A fortnight and odd days.,Two weeks and a few odd days.
"Even or odd, of all days in the year, Come Lammas Eve at night shall she be fourteen. Were of an age. Well, Susan is with God. She was too good for me. But, as I said, On Lammas Eve at night shall she be fourteen. That shall she. Marry, I remember it well. And she was weaned—I never shall forget it— Of all the days of the year, upon that day. For I had then laid wormwood to my dug, Sitting in the sun under the dovehouse wall. Nay, I do bear a brain.—But, as I said, When it did taste the wormwood on the nipple Of my dug and felt it bitter, pretty fool, To see it tetchy and fall out with the dug! To bid me trudge. And since that time it is eleven years, For then she could stand alone. Nay, by the rood, She could have run and waddled all about, And then my husband—God be with his soul! He was a merry man—took up the child. “Yea,” quoth he, “Dost thou fall upon thy face? Thou wilt fall backward when thou hast more wit, The pretty wretch left crying and said “ay.” To see now, how a jest shall come about! I warrant, an I should live a thousand years, I never should forget it. “Wilt thou not, Jule?” quoth he.","Whether it’s even or odd, of all the days in the year, on the night of Lammas Eve, she’ll be fourteen. She and Susan—God rest her and all Christian souls—were born on the same day. Well, Susan died and is with God. She was too good for me. But like I said, on the night of Lammas Eve, she will be fourteen. Yes, she will. Indeed, I remember it well. It’s been eleven years since the earthquake. She stopped nursing from my breast on that very day. I’ll never forget it. I had put bitter wormwood on my breast as I was sitting in the sun, under the wall of the dovehouse. You and your husband were in Mantua. Boy, do I have some memory! But like I said, when she tasted the bitter wormwood on my nipple, the pretty little babe got irritated and started to quarrel with my breast. Then the dovehouse shook with the earthquake. There was no need to tell me to get out of there. That was eleven years ago. By then she could stand up all by herself. No, I swear, by that time she could run and waddle all around. I remember because she had cut her forehead just the day before. My husband—God rest his soul, he was a happy man—picked up the child. “Oh,” he said, “Did you fall on your face? You’ll fall backward “Fall backward” = have sex. fall backward when you grow smarter. Won’t you, Jule.” And I swear, the poor pretty thing stopped crying and said, “Yes.” Oh, to watch a joke come true! I bet if I live a thousand years, I’ll never forget it. “Won’t you, Jule,” he said. And the pretty fool stopped crying and said, “Yes.”"
"Enough of this. I pray thee, hold thy peace.",Enough of this. Please be quiet.
"Yes, madam. Yet I cannot choose but laugh To think it should leave crying and say “ay.” And yet, I warrant, it had upon its brow A perilous knock, and it cried bitterly. “Yea,” quoth my husband, “Fall’st upon thy face? Thou wilt fall backward when thou comest to age. Wilt thou not, Jule?” It stinted and said “ay.”","Yes ,madam. But I can’t help laughing to think that the baby stopped crying and said, “Yes.” I swear, she had a bump on her forehead as big as a rooster’s testicle. It was a painful bruise, and she was crying bitterly. “Yes,” said my husband, “Did you fall on your face? You’ll fall backward when you grow up, won’t you, Jule?” And she stopped crying and said, “Yes.”"
"And stint thou too, I pray thee, Nurse, say I.","Now you stop too, Nurse, please."
"Peace, I have done. God mark thee to his grace! Thou wast the prettiest babe that e'er I nursed. An I might live to see thee married once, I have my wish.","Peace. I’m done talking. May God choose you to receive his grace. You were the prettiest baby I ever nursed. If I live to see you get married someday, all my wishes will come true."
"I came to talk of. Tell me, daughter Juliet, How stands your disposition to be married?","Well, marriage is exactly what we have to discuss. Tell me, my daughter Juliet, what is your attitude about getting married?"
It is an honor that I dream not of.,It is an honor that I do not dream of.
"An honor! Were not I thine only nurse,","“An honor?” If I weren’t your only nurse, I’d say you had sucked wisdom from the breast that fed you."
"Well, think of marriage now. Younger than you Here in Verona, ladies of esteem Are made already mothers. By my count, I was your mother much upon these years The valiant Paris seeks you for his love.","Well, start thinking about marriage now. Here in Verona there are girls younger than you—girls from noble families—who have already become mothers. By my count, I was already your mother at just about your age, while you remain a virgin. Well then, I’ll say this quickly: the valiant Paris wants you as his bride."
"A man, young lady! Lady, such a man As all the world. Why, he’s a man of wax.","What a man, young lady. He’s as great a man as any in the whole world. He’s as perfect as if he were sculpted from wax."
Verona’s summer hath not such a flower.,Summertime in Verona has no flower as fine as him.
"Nay, he’s a flower. In faith, a very flower.","No, he’s a fine flower, truly, a flower."
"What say you? Can you love the gentleman? This night you shall behold him at our feast. Read o'er the volume of young Paris' face And find delight writ there with beauty’s pen. And see how one another lends content, And what obscured in this fair volume lies Find written in the margin of his eyes. This precious book of love, this unbound lover, The fish lives in the sea, and ’tis much pride For fair without the fair within to hide. That book in many’s eyes doth share the glory That in gold clasps locks in the golden story. By having him, making yourself no less.","(to JULIET) What do you say? Can you love this gentleman? Tonight you’ll see him at our feast. Study Paris’s face and find pleasure in his beauty. Examine every line of his features and see how they work together to make him handsome. If you are confused, just look into his eyes. This man is single, and he lacks only a bride to make him perfect and complete. As is right, fish live in the sea, and it’s wrong for a beauty like you to hide from a handsome man like him. Many people think he’s handsome, and whoever becomes his bride will be just as admired. You would share all that he possesses, and by having him, you would lose nothing."
"No less? Nay, bigger. Women grow by men.","Lose nothing? In fact, you’d get bigger. Men make women bigger by getting them pregnant."
"Speak briefly. Can you like of Paris, love?",(to JULIET) Give us a quick answer. Can you accept Paris’s love?
I’ll look to like if looking liking move. Than your consent gives strength to make it fly.,"I’ll look at him and try to like him, at least if what I see is likable. But I won’t let myself fall for him any more than your permission allows."
"Madam, the guests are come, supper served up, you called, my young lady asked for, the Nurse cursed in the pantry, and every thing in extremity. I must hence to wait. I beseech you, follow straight.","Madam, the guests are here, dinner is served, people are calling for you, people have asked for Juliet, and in the pantry, people are cursing the Nurse. Everything’s out of control. I must go and serve the guests. Please, follow straight after me."
"We follow thee.—Juliet, the county stays.","We’ll follow you. Juliet, the count is waiting for you."
"Go, girl, seek happy nights to happy days.","Go, girl, look for a man who’ll give you happy nights at the end of happy days."
"What, shall this speech be spoke for our excuse? Or shall we on without apology?",What will we say is our excuse for being here? Or should we enter without apologizing?
"The date is out of such prolixity. We’ll have no Cupid hoodwinked with a scarf, Scaring the ladies like a crowkeeper, Nor no without-book prologue, faintly spoke After the prompter for our entrance. But let them measure us by what they will.","It’s out of fashion to give lengthy explanations like that. We’re not going to introduce our dance by having someone dress up as Cupid, blindfolded and carrying a toy bow to frighten the ladies like a scarecrow. Nor are we going to recite a memorized speech to introduce ourselves. Let them judge us however they please. We’ll give them a dance and then hit the road."
"Give me a torch. I am not for this ambling. Being but heavy, I will bear the light.","Give me a torch. I don’t want to dance. I feel sad, so let me be the one who carries the light."
"Nay, gentle Romeo, we must have you dance.","No, noble Romeo, you’ve got to dance."
"Not I, believe me. You have dancing shoes So stakes me to the ground I cannot move.","Not me, believe me. You’re wearing dancing shoes with nimble soles. My soul is made out of lead, and it’s so heavy it keeps me stuck on the ground so I can’t move."
You are a lover. Borrow Cupid’s wings And soar with them above a common bound.,You’re a lover. Take Cupid’s wings and fly higher than the average man.
I am too sore enpiercèd with his shaft I cannot bound a pitch above dull woe. Under love’s heavy burden do I sink.,"His arrow has pierced me too deeply, so I can’t fly high with his cheerful feathers. Because this wound keeps me down, I can’t leap any higher than my dull sadness. I sink under the heavy weight of love."
"And to sink in it, should you burthen love— Too great oppression for a tender thing.","If you sink, you’re dragging love down. It’s not right to drag down something as tender as love."
"Too rude, too boisterous, and it pricks like thorn.","Is love really tender? I think it’s too rough, too rude, too rowdy, and it pricks like a thorn."
"If love be rough with you, be rough with love. Prick love for pricking, and you beat love down.— Give me a case to put my visage in! What curious eye doth cote deformities? Here are the beetle brows shall blush for me.","If love plays rough with you, play rough with love Mercutio suggests that Romeo cure himself of love by having sex. love . If you prick love when it pricks you, you’ll beat love down. Give me a mask to put my face in. A mask to put over my other mask. What do I care if some curious person sees my flaws? Let this mask, with its black eyebrows, blush for me. (they put on masks)"
"Come, knock and enter. And no sooner in But every man betake him to his legs.","Come on, let’s knock and go in. The minute we get in let’s all start dancing."
"Tickle the senseless rushes with their heels. For I am proverbed with a grandsire phrase, I’ll be a candle holder, and look on. The game was ne'er so fair, and I am done.","I’ll take a torch. Let playful people with light hearts dance. There’s an old saying that applies to me: you can’t lose if you don’t play the game. I’ll just hold a torch and watch you guys. It looks like a lot of fun, but I’ll sit this one out."
"If thou art dun, we’ll draw thee from the mire, Or—save your reverence—love, wherein thou stick’st Up to the ears. Come, we burn daylight, ho!","Hey, you’re being a stick in the mud, as cautious as a policemen on night patrol. If you’re a stick in the mud, we’ll pull you out of the mud—I mean out of love, if you’ll excuse me for being so rude—where you’re stuck up to your ears. Come on, we’re wasting precious daylight. Let’s go!"
"Nay, that’s not so.",No we’re not—it’s night.
"I mean, sir, in delay. Take our good meaning, for our judgment sits Five times in that ere once in our fine wits.","I mean, we’re wasting the light of our torches by delaying, which is like wasting the sunshine during the day. Use your common sense to figure out what I mean, instead of trying to be clever or trusting your five senses."
"And we mean well in going to this mask, But ’tis no wit to go.","We mean well by going to this masquerade ball, but it’s not smart of us to go."
"Why, may one ask?","Why, may I ask?"
I dreamt a dream tonight.,I had a dream last night.
And so did I.,So did I.
"Well, what was yours?","Well, what was your dream?"
That dreamers often lie.,My dream told me that dreamers often lie.
In bed asleep while they do dream things true.,They lie in bed while they dream about the truth.
"Oh, then, I see Queen Mab hath been with you.","Oh, then I see you’ve been with Queen “Quean” is slang for whore, and Mab is a stereotypical prostitute’s name. Queen Mab."
"Queen Mab, what’s she",Who’s Queen Mab?
"In shape no bigger than an agate stone On the forefinger of an alderman, Drawn with a team of little atomi Over men’s noses as they lie asleep. The cover of the wings of grasshoppers, Her traces of the smallest spider’s web, Her collars of the moonshine’s watery beams, Her whip of cricket’s bone, the lash of film, Not half so big as a round little worm Pricked from the lazy finger of a maid.","She’s the fairies' midwife. She’s no bigger than the stone on a city councilman’s ring. She rides around in a wagon drawn by tiny little atoms, and she rides over men’s noses as they lie sleeping. The spokes of her wagon are made of spiders' legs. The cover of her wagon is made of grasshoppers' wings. The harnesses are made of the smallest spiderwebs. The collars are made out of moonbeams. Her whip is a thread attached to a cricket’s bone. Her wagon driver is a tiny bug in a gray coat; he’s not half the size of a little round worm It was believed that worms sprung from the fingers of young girls who sat about doing nothing. worm that comes from the finger of a lazy young girl."
"Her chariot is an empty hazelnut Made by the joiner squirrel or old grub, And in this state she gallops night by night Through lovers' brains, and then they dream of love; On courtiers' knees, that dream on curtsies straight; O'er lawyers' fingers, who straight dream on fees; Which oft the angry Mab with blisters plagues, Because their breaths with sweetmeats tainted are. Sometime she gallops o'er a courtier’s nose, And then dreams he of smelling out a suit. Tickling a parson’s nose as he lies asleep, Then he dreams of another benefice. Sometime she driveth o'er a soldier’s neck, And then dreams he of cutting foreign throats, Of healths five fathom deep, and then anon Drums in his ear, at which he starts and wakes, And being thus frighted swears a prayer or two And sleeps again. This is that very Mab And bakes the elflocks in foul sluttish hairs, Which once untangled, much misfortune bodes. This is the hag, when maids lie on their backs, That presses them and learns them first to bear, This is she—","Her chariot is a hazelnut shell. It was made by a carpenter squirrel or an old grubworm; they’ve made wagons for the fairies as long as anyone can remember. In this royal wagon, she rides every night through the brains of lovers and makes them dream about love. She rides over courtiers' knees, and they dream about curtsying. She rides over lawyers' fingers, and right away, they dream about their fees. She rides over ladies' lips, and they immediately dream of kisses. Queen Mab often puts blisters on their lips because their breath smells like candy, which makes her mad. Sometimes she rides over a courtier’s lips, and he dreams of making money off of someone. Sometimes she tickles a priest’s nose with a tithe-pigs A tithe-pig was a pig given to the church to support a priest. tithe-pigs tail, and he dreams of a large donation. Sometimes she rides over a soldier’s neck, and he dreams of cutting the throats of foreign enemies, of breaking down walls, of ambushes, of Spanish swords, and of enormous cups of liquor. And then, drums beat in his ear and he wakes up. He’s frightened, so he says a couple of prayers and goes back to sleep. She is the same Mab who tangles the hair in horses' manes at night and makes the tangles hard in the dirty hairs, which bring bad luck if they’re untangled. Mab is the old hag who gives false sex dreams to virgins and teaches them how to hold a lover and bear a child. She’s the one—"
"Peace, peace, Mercutio, peace! Thou talk’st of nothing.","Enough, enough! Mercutio, be quiet. You’re talking nonsense."
"True, I talk of dreams, Which are the children of an idle brain, Begot of nothing but vain fantasy, And more inconstant than the wind, who woos Even now the frozen bosom of the north, And, being angered, puffs away from thence, Turning his face to the dew-dropping south.","True. I’m talking about dreams, which are the products of a brain that’s doing nothing. Dreams are nothing but silly imagination, as thin as air, and less predictable than the wind, which sometimes blows on the frozen north and then gets angry and blows south."
"Supper is done, and we shall come too late.","The wind you’re talking about is blowing us off our course. Dinner is over, and we’re going to get there too late."
"I fear too early, for my mind misgives Some consequence yet hanging in the stars Shall bitterly begin his fearful date Of a despisèd life closed in my breast By some vile forfeit of untimely death. But he that hath the steerage of my course, Direct my sail. On, lusty gentlemen.","I’m worried we’ll get there too early. I have a feeling this party tonight will be the start of something bad, something that will end with my own death. But whoever’s in charge of where my life’s going can steer me wherever they want. Onward, lover boys!"
"Strike, drum.",Beat the drum.
"Where’s Potpan, that he helps not to take away? He shift a trencher? He scrape a trencher!",Where’s Potpan? Why isn’t he helping us clear the table? He should be moving and scraping plates!
"When good manners shall lie all in one or two men’s hands, and they unwashed too, ’tis a foul thing.","When only one or two men have all the good manners, and even they are dirty, things are bad."
"Away with the joint-stools, remove the court-cupboard, look to the plate. Good thou, save me a piece of marchpane, and, as thou loves me, let the porter let in Susan Grindstone and Nell.—Antony and Potpan!","Take away the stools, the sideboards, and the plates. You, good friend, save me a piece of marzipan, and if you love me, have the porter let in Susan Grindstone and Nell. Antony and Potpan!"
"Ay, boy, ready.","Yes, boy, I’m ready."
"You are looked for and called for, asked for and sought for, in the great chamber.",They’re looking for you in the great chamber.
"We cannot be here and there too. Cheerly, boys. Be brisk awhile, and the longer liver take all.","We can’t be in two places at once, both here and there! Cheers, boys. Be quick for a while and let the one who lives the longest take everything."
"Welcome, gentlemen! Ladies that have their toes Unplagued with corns will walk a bout with you.— Will now deny to dance? She that makes dainty, She, I’ll swear, hath corns. Am I come near ye now?— Welcome, gentlemen! I have seen the day A whispering tale in a fair lady’s ear Such as would please. 'Tis gone, ’tis gone, ’tis gone.— You are welcome, gentlemen.—Come, musicians, play. (music plays and they dance) More light, you knaves! And turn the tables up, And quench the fire. The room is grown too hot.— Ah, sirrah, this unlooked-for sport comes well.— Nay, sit, nay, sit, good cousin Capulet, How long is ’t now since last yourself and I Were in a mask?","Welcome, gentlemen. The ladies who don’t have corns on their toes will dance with you. Ha, my ladies, which of you will refuse to dance now? Whichever of you acts shy, I’ll swear she has corns. Does that hit close to home? Welcome, gentlemen. There was a time when I could wear a mask over my eyes and charm a lady by whispering a story in her ear. That time is gone, gone, gone. You are welcome gentlemen. Come on, musicians, play music. (music plays and they dance, ROMEO stands apart) Make room in the hall. Make room in the hall. Shake a leg, girls. (to SERVINGMEN) More light, you rascals. Flip over the tables and get them out of the way. And put the fire out—it’s getting too hot in here. (to his COUSIN) Ah, my man, this unexpected fun feels good. No, sit down, sit down, my good Capulet cousin. You and I are too old to dance. (CAPULET and his COUSIN sit down) How long is it now since you and I last wore masks at a party like this?"
"By'r Lady, thirty years.","I swear, it must be thirty years."
"What, man, ’tis not so much, ’tis not so much. 'Tis since the nuptials of Lucentio, Some five and twenty years, and then we masked.","What, man? It’s not that long, it’s not that long. It’s been since Lucentio’s wedding. Let the years fly by as fast as they like, it’s only been twenty-five years since we wore masks."
"'Tis more, ’tis more. His son is elder, sir. His son is thirty.","It’s been longer, it’s been longer. Lucentio’s son is older than that, sir. He’s thirty years old."
Will you tell me that? His son was but a ward two years ago.,Are you really going to tell me that? His son was a minor only two years ago.
Of yonder knight?,(to a SERVINGMAN) Who is the girl on the arm of that lucky knight over there?
"I know not, sir.","I don’t know, sir."
"Oh, she doth teach the torches to burn bright! It seems she hangs upon the cheek of night Like a rich jewel in an Ethiope’s ear, So shows a snowy dove trooping with crows As yonder lady o'er her fellows shows. The measure done, I’ll watch her place of stand, And, touching hers, make blessèd my rude hand. For I ne'er saw true beauty till this night.","Oh, she shows the torches how to burn bright! She stands out against the darkness like a jeweled earring hanging against the cheek of an African. Her beauty is too good for this world; she’s too beautiful to die and be buried. She outshines the other women like a white dove in the middle of a flock of crows. When this dance is over, I’ll see where she stands, and then I’ll touch her hand with my rough and ugly one. Did my heart ever love anyone before this moment? My eyes were liars, then, because I never saw true beauty before tonight."
"This, by his voice, should be a Montague.— (to his PAGE) Fetch me my rapier, boy.— What, dares the slave To fleer and scorn at our solemnity? Now, by the stock and honor of my kin, To strike him dead I hold it not a sin.","I can tell by his voice that this man is a Montague. (to his PAGE) Get me my sword, boy.—What, does this peasant dare to come here with his face covered by a mask to sneer at and scorn our celebration? Now, by the honor of our family, I do not consider it a crime to kill him."
"Why, how now, kinsman? Wherefore storm you so?","Why, what’s going on here, nephew? Why are you acting so angry?"
A villain that is hither come in spite To scorn at our solemnity this night.,"Uncle, this man is a Montague—our enemy. He’s a scoundrel who’s come here out of spite to mock our party."
Young Romeo is it?,Is it young Romeo?
"'Tis he, that villain Romeo.","That’s him, that villain Romeo."
"Content thee, gentle coz. Let him alone. And, to say truth, Verona brags of him To be a virtuous and well-governed youth. I would not for the wealth of all the town Here in my house do him disparagement. It is my will, the which if thou respect, Show a fair presence and put off these frowns, An ill-beseeming semblance for a feast.","Calm down, gentle cousin. Leave him alone. He carries himself like a dignified gentleman, and, to tell you the truth, he has a reputation throughout Verona as a virtuous and well-behaved young man. I wouldn’t insult him in my own house for all the wealth in this town. So calm down. Just ignore him. That’s what I want, and if you respect my wishes, you’ll look nice and stop frowning because that’s not the way you should behave at a feast."
It fits when such a villain is a guest.,It’s the right way to act when a villain like him shows up. I won’t tolerate him.
"He shall be endured. What, goodman boy! I say, he shall. Go to. Am I the master here, or you? Go to. You’ll not endure him! God shall mend my soul, You’ll make a mutiny among my guests.","You will tolerate him. What, little man? I say you will. What the—Am I the boss here or you? What the—You won’t tolerate him! God help me! You’ll start a riot among my guests! There will be chaos! It will be your fault, you’ll be the rabble-rouser!"
"Why, uncle, ’tis a shame.","But, uncle, we’re being disrespected."
"Go to, go to. You are a saucy boy. Is ’t so, indeed? This trick may chance to scathe you, I know what. You must contrary me. Marry, ’tis time.— Be quiet, or—More light, more light!—For shame! I’ll make you quiet.—What, cheerly, my hearts!","Go on, go on. You’re an insolent little boy. Is that how it is, really? This stupidity will come back to bite you. I know what I’ll do. You have to contradict me, do you? I’ll teach you a lesson. (to the GUESTS) Well done, my dear guests! (to TYBALT) You’re a punk, get away. Keep your mouth shut, or else— (to SERVINGMEN) more light, more light! (to TYBALT) You should be ashamed. ’ll shut you up. (to the guests) Keep having fun, my dear friends!"
"Patience perforce with willful choler meeting Makes my flesh tremble in their different greeting. Now seeming sweet, convert to bitterest gall.","The combination of forced patience and pure rage is making my body tremble. I’ll leave here now, but Romeo’s prank, which seems so sweet to him now, will turn bitter to him later."
"(taking JULIET’s hand) If I profane with my unworthiest hand This holy shrine, the gentle sin is this: My lips, two blushing pilgrims, ready stand","(taking JULIET’s hand) Your hand is like a holy place that my hand is unworthy to visit. If you’re offended by the touch of my hand, my two lips are standing here like blushing pilgrims, ready to make things better with a kiss. The first fourteen lines Romeo and Juliet speak together form a sonnet."
"Good pilgrim, you do wrong your hand too much, Which mannerly devotion shows in this, For saints have hands that pilgrims' hands do touch, And palm to palm is holy palmers' kiss.","Good pilgrim, you don’t give your hand enough credit. By holding my hand you show polite devotion. After all, pilgrims touch the hands of statues of saints. Holding one palm against another is like a kiss."
"Have not saints lips, and holy palmers too?",Don’t saints and pilgrims have lips too?
"Ay, pilgrim, lips that they must use in prayer.","Yes, pilgrim—they have lips that they’re supposed to pray with."
"O, then, dear saint, let lips do what hands do. They pray; grant thou, lest faith turn to despair.","Well then, saint, let lips do what hands do. I’m praying for you to kiss me. Please grant my prayer so my faith doesn’t turn to despair."
"Saints do not move, though grant for prayers' sake.","Saints don’t move, even when they grant prayers."
"Then move not, while my prayer’s effect I take.",Then don’t move while I act out my prayer.
Kisses her,He kisses her.
"Thus from my lips, by thine, my sin is purged.",Now my sin has been taken from my lips by yours.
Then have my lips the sin that they have took.,Then do my lips now have the sin they took from yours?
Sin from thy lips? O trespass sweetly urged!,Sin from my lips? You encourage crime with your sweetness. Give me my sin back.
You kiss by th' book.,You kiss like you’ve studied how.
"Madam, your mother craves a word with you.","Madam, your mother wants to talk to you."
What is her mother?,Who is her mother?
"Marry, bachelor, Her mother is the lady of the house, And a good lady, and a wise and virtuous. I tell you, he that can lay hold of her Shall have the chinks.","Indeed, young man, her mother is the lady of the house. She is a good, wise, and virtuous lady. I nursed her daughter, whom you were just talking to. Let me tell you, the man who marries her will become very wealthy."
(aside) Is she a Capulet? O dear account! My life is my foe’s debt.,"(to himself) Is she a Capulet? Oh, this is a heavy price to pay! My life is in the hands of my enemy."
"(to ROMEO) Away, begone. The sport is at the best.","(to ROMEO) Come on, let’s go. Right when things are the most fun is the best time to leave."
"Ay, so I fear. The more is my unrest.","Yes, but I’m afraid I’m in more trouble than ever."
"Nay, gentlemen, prepare not to be gone. We have a trifling foolish banquet towards.— Is it e'en so? Why, then, I thank you all. I thank you, honest gentlemen. Good night.— Ah, sirrah, by my fay, it waxes late. I’ll to my rest.","No gentlemen, don’t get ready to go now. We have a little dessert coming up. (they whisper in his ear) Is that really true? Well, then, I thank you both. I thank you, honest gentlemen. Good night. Bring more torches over here! Come on, let’s all get to bed. (to his COUSIN) Ah, my man, I swear, it’s getting late. I’m going to get some rest."
"Come hither, Nurse. What is yond gentleman?","Come over here, nurse. Who is that gentleman?"
The son and heir of old Tiberio.,He is the son and heir of old Tiberio.
What’s he that now is going out of door?,Who’s the one who’s going out the door right now?
"Marry, that, I think, be young Petruchio.","Well, that one, I think, is young Petruchio."
"What’s he that follows here, that would not dance?","Who’s the one following over there, the one who wouldn’t dance?"
I know not.,I don’t know his name.
Go ask his name.—If he be married.,"Go ask. (the nurse leaves) If he’s married, I think I’ll die rather than marry anyone else."
"His name is Romeo, and a Montague, The only son of your great enemy.",(returning) His name is Romeo. He’s a Montague. He’s the only son of your worst enemy.
"(aside) My only love sprung from my only hate! Too early seen unknown, and known too late! That I must love a loathèd enemy.","(to herself) The only man I love is the son of the only man I hate! I saw him too early without knowing who he was, and I found out who he was too late! Love is a monster for making me fall in love with my worst enemy."
What’s this? What’s this?,What’s this? What’s this?
A rhyme I learned even now Of one I danced withal.,Just a rhyme I learned from somebody I danced with at the party.
"Anon, anon! Come, let’s away. The strangers all are gone.","Right away, right away. Come, let’s go. The strangers are all gone."
"Now old desire doth in his deathbed lie, And young affection gapes to be his heir. That fair for which love groaned for and would die With tender Juliet matched, is now not fair. Alike bewitchèd by the charm of looks, But to his foe supposed he must complain, And she steal love’s sweet bait from fearful hooks. Being held a foe, he may not have access And she as much in love, her means much less To meet her new beloved anywhere. But passion lends them power, time means, to meet, Tempering extremities with extreme sweet.","Now Romeo’s old feelings of desire are dying, and a new desire is eager to take their place. Romeo groaned for the beautiful Rosaline and said he would die for her, but compared with tender Juliet, Rosaline doesn’t seem beautiful now. Now someone loves Romeo, and he’s in love again—both of them falling for each others' good looks. But he has to make his speeches of love to a woman who’s supposed to be his enemy. And she’s been hooked by someone she should fear. Because he’s an enemy, Romeo has no chance to see Juliet and say the things a lover normally says. And Juliet’s just as much in love as he, but she has even less opportunity to meet her lover. But love gives them power, and time gives them the chance to meet, sweetening the extreme danger with intense pleasure."
"Can I go forward when my heart is here? Turn back, dull earth, and find thy center out.",Can I go away while my heart stays here? I have to go back to where my heart is.
"Romeo, my cousin Romeo! Romeo!","(calling) Romeo, my cousin, Romeo, Romeo!"
"He is wise, And, on my life, hath stol'n him home to bed.",He’s a smart boy. I bet he slipped away and went home to bed.
"Call, good Mercutio.","He ran this way and jumped over this orchard wall. Call to him, Mercutio."
"Nay, I’ll conjure too! Romeo! Humours, madman, passion, lover! Appear thou in the likeness of a sigh! Speak but one rhyme, and I am satisfied. Speak to my gossip Venus one fair word, One nickname for her purblind son and heir, Young Abraham Cupid, he that shot so true When King Cophetua loved the beggar maid.— The ape is dead, and I must conjure him.— I conjure thee by Rosaline’s bright eyes, By her high forehead and her scarlet lip, By her fine foot, straight leg, and quivering thigh, That in thy likeness thou appear to us.","I’ll conjure him as if I were summoning a spirit. Romeo! Madman! Passion! Lover! Show yourself in the form of a sigh. Speak one rhyme, and I’ll be satisfied. Just cry out, “Ah me!” Just say “love” and “dove.” Say just one lovely word to my good friend Venus Venus is the Roman goddess of love. Venus . Just say the nickname of her blind son Cupid, the one who shot arrows so well in the old story.—Romeo doesn’t hear me. He doesn’t stir. He doesn’t move. The silly ape is dead, but I must make him appear.—I summon you by Rosaline’s bright eyes, by her high forehead and her red lips, by her fine feet, by her straight legs, by her trembling thighs, and by the regions right next to her thighs. In the name of all of these things, I command you to appear before us in your true form."
"An if he hear thee, thou wilt anger him.","If he hears you, you’ll make him angry."
This cannot anger him. 'Twould anger him To raise a spirit in his mistress' circle Till she had laid it and conjured it down. That were some spite. My invocation Is fair and honest. In his mistress' name I conjure only but to raise up him.,What I’m saying can’t anger him. He would be angry if I summoned a strange spirit for her to have sex with—that’s what would make him angry. The things I’m saying are fair and honest. All I’m doing is saying the name of the woman he loves to lure him out of the darkness.
To be consorted with the humorous night. Blind is his love and best befits the dark.,"Come on. He’s hidden behind these trees to keep the night company. His love is blind, so it belongs in the dark."
"If love be blind, love cannot hit the mark. Now will he sit under a medlar tree As maids call medlars when they laugh alone.— O Romeo, that she were! Oh, that she were An open arse, and thou a poperin pear. Romeo, good night. I’ll to my truckle bed. Come, shall we go?","If love is blind, it can’t hit the target. Now he’ll sit under a medlar The medlar is a tree whose fruit was considered to look like a vulva or an anus. The fruits were often called “open-arses.” Popperins are Belgian pears; Mercutio uses the name in an obscene double entrendre. medlar tree and wish his mistress were one of those fruits that look like female genitalia. Oh Romeo, I wish she were an open-arse, and you a Popperin pear to “pop her in.” Good night, Romeo. I’ll go to my little trundle bed. This open field is too cold a place for me to sleep. (to BENVOLIO) Come on, should we go?"
"Go, then, for ’tis in vain To seek him here that means not to be found.",Let’s go. There’s no point in looking for him if he doesn’t want to be found.
He jests at scars that never felt a wound.,It’s easy for someone to joke about scars if they’ve never been cut.
"But soft! What light through yonder window breaks? It is the east, and Juliet is the sun. Arise, fair sun, and kill the envious moon, That thou, her maid, art far more fair than she. Be not her maid since she is envious. Her vestal livery is but sick and green, And none but fools do wear it. Cast it off! Oh, that she knew she were! She speaks, yet she says nothing. What of that? Her eye discourses. I will answer it.— I am too bold. 'Tis not to me she speaks. Having some business, do entreat her eyes To twinkle in their spheres till they return. What if her eyes were there, they in her head? The brightness of her cheek would shame those stars Would through the airy region stream so bright That birds would sing and think it were not night. See how she leans her cheek upon her hand. Oh, that I were a glove upon that hand","But wait, what’s that light in the window over there? It is the east, and Juliet is the sun. Rise up, beautiful sun, and kill the jealous moon Diana is the goddess of the moon and of virginity. Romeo implies that Juliet is a servant of the moon as long as she’s a virgin. jealous moon . The moon is already sick and pale with grief because you, Juliet, her maid, are more beautiful than she. Don’t be her maid, because she is jealous. Virginity makes her look sick and green. Only fools hold on to their virginity. Let it go. Oh, there’s my lady! Oh, it is my love. Oh, I wish she knew how much I love her. She’s talking, but she’s not saying anything. So what? Her eyes are saying something. I will answer them. I am too bold. She’s not talking to me. Two of the brightest stars in the whole sky had to go away on business, and they’re asking her eyes to twinkle in their places until they return. What if her eyes were in the sky and the stars were in her head?—The brightness of her cheeks would outshine the stars the way the sun outshines a lamp. If her eyes were in the night sky, they would shine so brightly through space that birds would start singing, thinking her light was the light of day. Look how she leans her hand on her cheek. Oh, I wish I was the glove on that hand so that I could touch that cheek."
Ay me!,"Oh, my!"
"(aside) She speaks. O, speak again, bright angel! For thou art As glorious to this night, being o'er my head, As is a wingèd messenger of heaven Unto the white, upturnèd, wondering eyes When he bestrides the lazy-puffing clouds And sails upon the bosom of the air.","(to himself) She speaks. Oh, speak again, bright angel. You are as glorious as an angel tonight. You shine above me, like a winged messenger from heaven who makes mortal men fall on their backs to look up at the sky, watching the angel walking on the clouds and sailing on the air."
"O Romeo, Romeo! Wherefore art thou Romeo? Deny thy father and refuse thy name. And I’ll no longer be a Capulet.","(not knowing ROMEO hears her) Oh, Romeo, Romeo, why do you have to be Romeo? Forget about your father and change your name. Or else, if you won’t change your name, just swear you love me and I’ll stop being a Capulet."
"(aside) Shall I hear more, or shall I speak at this?","(to himself) Should I listen for more, or should I speak now?"
"'Tis but thy name that is my enemy. Thou art thyself, though not a Montague. Nor arm, nor face, nor any other part Belonging to a man. O, be some other name! What’s in a name? That which we call a rose By any other word would smell as sweet. Retain that dear perfection which he owes Without that title. Romeo, doff thy name, And for that name, which is no part of thee Take all myself.","(still not knowing ROMEO hears her) It’s only your name that’s my enemy. You’d still be yourself even if you stopped being a Montague. What’s a Montague anyway? It isn’t a hand, a foot, an arm, a face, or any other part of a man. Oh, be some other name! What does a name mean? The thing we call a rose would smell just as sweet if we called it by any other name. Romeo would be just as perfect even if he wasn’t called Romeo. Romeo, lose your name. Trade in your name—which really has nothing to do with you—and take all of me in exchange."
I take thee at thy word. Henceforth I never will be Romeo.,"(to JULIET) I trust your words. Just call me your love, and I will take a new name. From now on I will never be Romeo again."
"What man art thou that, thus bescreened in night, So stumblest on my counsel?",Who are you? Why do you hide in the darkness and listen to my private thoughts?
"By a name I know not how to tell thee who I am. Because it is an enemy to thee. Had I it written, I would tear the word.","I don’t know how to tell you who I am by telling you a name. I hate my name, dear saint, because my name is your enemy. If I had it written down, I would tear up the paper."
"My ears have not yet drunk a hundred words Of that tongue’s uttering, yet I know the sound.","I haven’t heard you say a hundred words yet, but I recognize the sound of your voice. Aren’t you Romeo? And aren’t you a Montague?"
"Neither, fair maid, if either thee dislike.",I am neither of those things if you dislike them.
"How camest thou hither, tell me, and wherefore? The orchard walls are high and hard to climb, And the place death, considering who thou art,","Tell me, how did you get in here? And why did you come? The orchard walls are high, and it’s hard to climb over them. If any of my relatives find you here they’ll kill you because of who you are."
"With love’s light wings did I o'erperch these walls, For stony limits cannot hold love out, And what love can do, that dares love attempt. Therefore thy kinsmen are no stop to me.","I flew over these walls with the light wings of love. Stone walls can’t keep love out. Whatever a man in love can possibly do, his love will make him try to do it. Therefore your relatives are no obstacle."
If they do see thee they will murder thee.,"If they see you, they’ll murder you."
"Alack, there lies more peril in thine eye Than twenty of their swords. Look thou but sweet, And I am proof against their enmity.","Alas, one angry look from you would be worse than twenty of your relatives with swords. Just look at me kindly, and I’m invincible against their hatred."
I would not for the world they saw thee here.,I’d give anything to keep them from seeing you here.
"And but thou love me, let them find me here. My life were better ended by their hate Than death proroguèd, wanting of thy love.","The darkness will hide me from them. And if you don’t love me, let them find me here. I’d rather they killed me than have to live without your love."
By whose direction found’st thou out this place?,Who told you how to get here below my bedroom?
"He lent me counsel and I lent him eyes. I am no pilot. Yet, wert thou as far As that vast shore washed with the farthest sea, I would adventure for such merchandise.","Love showed me the way—the same thing that made me look for you in the first place. Love told me what to do, and I let love borrow my eyes. I’m not a sailor, but if you were across the farthest sea, I would risk everything to gain you."
"Else would a maiden blush bepaint my cheek For that which thou hast heard me speak tonight. Fain would I dwell on form. Fain, fain deny What I have spoke. But farewell compliment! And I will take thy word. Yet if thou swear’st Thou mayst prove false. At lovers' perjuries, They say, Jove laughs. O gentle Romeo, If thou dost love, pronounce it faithfully. I’ll frown and be perverse and say thee nay, So thou wilt woo. But else, not for the world. In truth, fair Montague, I am too fond, And therefore thou mayst think my 'havior light. Than those that have more coying to be strange. I should have been more strange, I must confess, But that thou overheard’st, ere I was 'ware, My true love’s passion. Therefore pardon me, Which the dark night hath so discovered.","You can’t see my face because it’s dark out. Otherwise, you’d see me blushing about the things you’ve heard me say tonight. I would be happy to keep up good manners and deny the things I said. But forget about good manners. Do you love me? I know you’ll say “yes,” and I’ll believe you. But if you swear you love me, you might turn out to be lying. They say Jove Jove, also called Jupiter, was the king of the Roman gods. Jove laughs when lovers lie to each other. Oh Romeo, if you really love me, say it truly. Or if you think it’s too easy and quick to win my heart, I’ll frown and play hard-to-get, as long as that will make you try to win me, but otherwise I wouldn’t act that way for anything. In truth, handsome Montague, I like you too much, so you may think my behavior is loose. But trust me, gentleman, I’ll prove myself more faithful than girls who act coy and play hard-to-get. I should have been more standoffish, I confess, but you overheard me talking about the love in my heart when I didn’t know you were there. So excuse me, and do not assume that because you made me love you so easily my love isn’t serious."
"Lady, by yonder blessèd moon I vow, That tips with silver all these fruit-tree tops—","Lady, I swear by the sacred moon above, the moon that paints the tops of fruit trees with silver—"
"O, swear not by the moon, th' inconstant moon, Lest that thy love prove likewise variable.",Don’t swear by the moon. The moon is always changing. Every month its position in the sky shifts. I don’t want you to turn out to be that inconsistent too.
What shall I swear by?,What should I swear by?
"Do not swear at all. Or, if thou wilt, swear by thy gracious self, Which is the god of my idolatry,","Don’t swear at all. But if you have to swear, swear by your wonderful self, which is the god I worship like an idol, and then I’ll believe you."
If my heart’s dear love—,If my heart’s dear love—
"Well, do not swear. Although I joy in thee, I have no joy of this contract tonight. It is too rash, too unadvised, too sudden, Too like the lightning, which doth cease to be This bud of love, by summer’s ripening breath, May prove a beauteous flower when next we meet. Good night, good night! As sweet repose and rest Come to thy heart as that within my breast.","Well, don’t swear. Although you bring me joy, I can’t take joy in this exchange of promises tonight. It’s too crazy. We haven’t done enough thinking. It’s too sudden. It’s too much like lightning, which flashes and then disappears before you can say, “it’s lightning.” My sweet, good night. Our love, which right now is like a flower bud in the summer air, may turn out to be a beautiful flower by the next time we meet. I hope you enjoy the same sweet peace and rest I feel in my heart."
"O, wilt thou leave me so unsatisfied?","Oh, are you going to leave me so unsatisfied?"
What satisfaction canst thou have tonight?,What satisfaction could you possibly have tonight?
Th' exchange of thy love’s faithful vow for mine.,I would be satisfied if we made each other true promises of love.
"I gave thee mine before thou didst request it, And yet I would it were to give again.","I pledged my love to you before you asked me to. Yet I wish I could take that promise back, so I had it to give again."
"Wouldst thou withdraw it? For what purpose, love?","You would take it back? Why would you do that, my love?"
"But to be frank, and give it thee again. And yet I wish but for the thing I have. My bounty is as boundless as the sea, My love as deep. The more I give to thee,","Only to be generous and give it to you once more. But I’m wishing for something I already have. My generosity to you is as limitless as the sea, and my love is as deep. The more love I give you, the more I have. Both loves are infinite."
"I hear some noise within. Dear love, adieu.— Anon, good Nurse!—Sweet Montague, be true. Stay but a little. I will come again.","I hear a noise inside. Dear love, goodbye—Just a minute, good Nurse. Sweet Montague, be true. Stay here for a moment. I’ll come back."
"O blessèd, blessèd night! I am afeard, Too flattering sweet to be substantial.","Oh, blessed, blessed night! Because it’s dark out, I’m afraid all this is just a dream, too sweet to be real."
"Three words, dear Romeo, and good night indeed. If that thy bent of love be honorable, Thy purpose marriage, send me word tomorrow Where and what time thou wilt perform the rite, And all my fortunes at thy foot I’ll lay And follow thee my lord throughout the world.","Three words, dear Romeo, and then it’s good night for real. If your intentions as a lover are truly honorable and you want to marry me, send me word tomorrow. I’ll send a messenger to you, and you can pass on a message telling me where and when we’ll be married. I’ll lay all my fortunes at your feet and follow you, my lord, all over the world."
(from within) Madam!,(offstage) Madam!
I do beseech thee—,"(to the NURSE) I’ll be right there! (to ROMEO) But if you don’t have honorable intentions, I beg you—"
(from within) Madam!,(offstage) Madam!
"By and by, I come.— To cease thy strife and leave me to my grief.","Alright, I’m coming!—I beg you to stop trying for me and leave me to my sadness. Tomorrow I’ll send the messenger."
So thrive my soul—,My soul depends on it—
A thousand times good night!,A thousand times good night.
"A thousand times the worse to want thy light. Love goes toward love as schoolboys from their books,","Leaving you is a thousand times worse than being near you. A lover goes toward his beloved as enthusiastically as a schoolboy leaving his books, but when he leaves his girlfriend, he feels as miserable as the schoolboy on his way to school."
"Hist! Romeo, hist!—Oh, for a falconer’s voice, To lure this tassel-gentle back again! Bondage is hoarse, and may not speak aloud, Else would I tear the cave where Echo lies, With repetition of “My Romeo!”","Hist, Romeo! Hist! Oh, I wish I could make a falconer’s Juliet is trying to call to Romeo as if he was a falcon. falconer’s call, so I could bring my little falcon back again. I’m trapped in my family’s house, so I must be quiet. Otherwise I would rip open the cave where Echo Echo, a mythical woman who was scorned by Narcissus, withered with sadness repeating his name, and after her death, her voice still reverberated in caves, which is why we have the word “echo.” Echo sleeps. I would make her repeat his name until her voice grew more hoarse than mine by repeating, “My Romeo!”"
"It is my soul that calls upon my name. How silver-sweet sound lovers' tongues by night, Like softest music to attending ears!",My soul is calling out my name. The sound of lovers calling each others names through the night is silver-sweet. It’s the sweetest sound a lover ever hears.
Romeo!,Romeo!
My nyas?,My baby hawk?
What o'clock tomorrow Shall I send to thee?,What time tomorrow should I send a messenger to you?
By the hour of nine.,By nine o'clock.
I will not fail. 'Tis twenty year till then. I have forgot why I did call thee back.,I won’t fail. From now until then seems like twenty years. I have forgotten why I called you back.
Let me stand here till thou remember it.,Let me stand here until you remember your reason.
Remembering how I love thy company.,"I’ll forget it, and you’ll have to stand there forever. I’ll only remember how much I love your company."
"And I’ll still stay, to have thee still forget, Forgetting any other home but this.","I’ll keep standing here, even if you keep forgetting. I’ll forget that I have any home besides this spot right here."
"'Tis almost morning. I would have thee gone. That lets it hop a little from his hand Like a poor prisoner in his twisted gyves, And with a silken thread plucks it back again, So loving-jealous of his liberty.","It’s almost morning. I want to make you go, but I’d only let you go as far as a spoiled child lets his pet bird go. He lets the bird hop a little from his hand and then yanks him back by a string."
I would I were thy bird.,I wish I was your bird.
"Sweet, so would I. Yet I should kill thee with much cherishing. Good night, good night! Parting is such sweet sorrow That I shall say good night till it be morrow.","My sweet, so do I. But I would kill you by petting you too much. Good night, good night. Parting is such sweet sorrow that I’ll say good night until tonight becomes tomorrow."
"Sleep dwell upon thine eyes, peace in thy breast. Hence will I to my ghostly friar’s close cell, His help to crave and my dear hap to tell.","I hope you sleep peacefully. I wish I were Sleep and Peace, so I could spend the night with you. Now I’ll go see my priest, to ask for his help and tell him about my good luck."
"The gray-eyed morn smiles on the frowning night, Checkering the eastern clouds with streaks of light, And fleckled darkness like a drunkard reels From forth day’s path and Titan’s fiery wheels. The day to cheer and night’s dank dew to dry, I must upfill this osier cage of ours With baleful weeds and precious-juicèd flowers. The earth, that’s nature’s mother, is her tomb. And from her womb children of divers kind We sucking on her natural bosom find, Many for many virtues excellent, None but for some and yet all different. In herbs, plants, stones, and their true qualities. For naught so vile that on the earth doth live But to the earth some special good doth give. Nor aught so good but, strained from that fair use Virtue itself turns vice, being misapplied, And vice sometime by action dignified.","The smiling morning is replacing the frowning night. Darkness is stumbling out of the sun’s path like a drunk man. Now, before the sun comes up and burns away the dew, I have to fill this basket of mine with poisonous weeds and medicinal flowers. The Earth is nature’s mother and also nature’s tomb. Plants are born out of the Earth, and they are buried in the Earth when they die. From the Earth’s womb, many different sorts of plants and animals come forth, and the Earth provides her children with many excellent forms of nourishment. Everything nature creates has some special property, and each one is different. Herbs, plants, and stones possess great power. There is nothing on Earth that is so evil that it does not provide the earth with some special quality. And there is nothing that does not turn bad if it’s put to the wrong use and abused. Virtue turns to vice if it’s misused. Vice sometimes becomes virtue through the right activity."
"Within the infant rind of this small flower Poison hath residence and medicine power. Being tasted, stays all senses with the heart. Two such opposèd kings encamp them still, In man as well as herbs—grace and rude will.","Inside the little rind of this weak flower, there is both poison and powerful medicine. If you smell it, you feel good all over your body. But if you taste it, you die. There are two opposite elements in everything, in men as well as in herbs—good and evil."
"And where the worser is predominant,","When evil is dominant, death soon kills the body like cancer."
"Good morrow, Father.","Good morning, father."
"Benedicite. What early tongue so sweet saluteth me? Young son, it argues a distempered head So soon to bid good morrow to thy bed. And where care lodges, sleep will never lie. But where unbruisèd youth with unstuffed brain Doth couch his limbs, there golden sleep doth reign. Therefore thy earliness doth me assure Or if not so, then here I hit it right: Our Romeo hath not been in bed tonight.","God bless you. Who greets me so early in the morning? Young man, something’s wrong if you’re getting out of bed this early. Every old man has worries, and worried men never get any sleep, but young men shouldn’t have a care in the world. They should get to bed early and get plenty of sleep. Therefore, the fact that you’re awake this early tells me you’ve been upset with some anxiety. If that’s not the case, then this must be the answer: You, Romeo, have not been to bed tonight."
That last is true. The sweeter rest was mine.,Your last guess is right. I enjoyed a sweeter rest than sleep.
God pardon sin! Wast thou with Rosaline?,May God forgive you if you’ve sinned!—Were you with Rosaline?
I have forgot that name and that name’s woe.,"With Rosaline, father? No, I have forgotten that girl and all the sadness she brought me."
"That’s my good son. But where hast thou been, then?","That’s good, my boy. But where have you been?"
"I’ll tell thee ere thou ask it me again. I have been feasting with mine enemy, That’s by me wounded. Both our remedies Within thy help and holy physic lies. I bear no hatred, blessèd man, for, lo, My intercession likewise steads my foe.","I’ll tell you before you have to ask me again. I have been feasting with my enemy. Suddenly someone wounded me with love and was wounded with love by me. You have the sacred power to cure both of us. I carry no hatred, holy man, because my request will benefit my enemy."
Riddling confession finds but riddling shrift.,"Speak plainly, make your meaning clear, my son. A jumbled confession can only receive a jumbled absolution."
"Then plainly know my heart’s dear love is set On the fair daughter of rich Capulet. As mine on hers, so hers is set on mine, By holy marriage. When and where and how We met, we wooed and made exchange of vow, I’ll tell thee as we pass, but this I pray: That thou consent to marry us today.","I love rich Capulet’s daughter. I love her, and she loves me. We’re bound to each other in every possible way, except we need you to marry us. I’ll tell you more later about when and where we met, how we fell in love, and how we exchanged promises, but now I’m begging you: please, agree to marry us today."
"Is Rosaline, whom thou didst love so dear, So soon forsaken? Young men’s love then lies Not truly in their hearts, but in their eyes. Jesu Maria, what a deal of brine How much salt water thrown away in waste To season love that of it doth not taste! The sun not yet thy sighs from heaven clears, Thy old groans ring yet in my ancient ears. Of an old tear that is not washed off yet. If e'er thou wast thyself and these woes thine, Thou and these woes were all for Rosaline. And art thou changed? Pronounce this sentence then:","Holy Saint Francis, this is a drastic change! Have you given up so quickly on Rosaline, whom you loved so much? Then young men love with their eyes, not with their hearts. Jesus and Mary, how many tears did you cry for Rosaline? How many salty tear-drops did you waste salting a love you never tasted? The sun hasn’t yet melted away the fog you made with all your sighs. The groans you used to make are still ringing in my old ears. There’s still a stain on your cheek from an old tear that hasn’t been washed off yet. If you were ever yourself, and this sadness was yours, you and your sadness were all for Rosaline. And now you’ve changed? Then repeat this after me: you can’t expect women to be faithful when men are so unreliable."
Thou chid’st me oft for loving Rosaline.,You scolded me often for loving Rosaline.
"For doting, not for loving, pupil mine.","I scolded you for obsessing about her, not for loving her, my student."
And badest me bury love.,And you told me to bury my love.
"Not in a grave, To lay one in, another out to have.",I didn’t tell you to get rid of one love and replace her with another.
Doth grace for grace and love for love allow. The other did not so.,"Please, I beg you, don’t scold me. The girl I love now returns my love. The other girl did not love me."
"Oh, she knew well Thy love did read by rote, that could not spell. But come, young waverer, come, go with me, For this alliance may so happy prove To turn your households' rancor to pure love.","Oh, she knew very well that you were acting like you were in love without really knowing what love means. But come on, inconsistent young man, come with me. I’ll help you with your secret wedding. This marriage may be lucky enough to turn the hatred between your families into pure love."
"Oh, let us hence. I stand on sudden haste.",Let’s get out of here. I’m in a rush.
Wisely and slow. They stumble that run fast.,Go wisely and slowly. Those who rush stumble and fall.
Where the devil should this Romeo be? Came he not home tonight?,Where the devil can Romeo be? Didn’t he come home last night?
Not to his father’s. I spoke with his man.,Not to his father’s house. I asked a servant.
"Why, that same pale hard-hearted wench, that Rosaline,","That fair-skinned, hard-hearted hussy, Rosaline is going to torment him until he goes insane."
"Tybalt, the kinsman to old Capulet, Hath sent a letter to his father’s house.","Tybalt, old Capulet’s nephew, has sent a letter to Romeo’s father’s house."
"A challenge, on my life.",I bet it’s a challenge.
Romeo will answer it.,Romeo will answer the challenge.
Any man that can write may answer a letter.,Any man who knows how to write can answer a letter.
"Nay, he will answer the letter’s master, how he dares, being dared.","No, Romeo will respond to the letter’s writer, telling him whether he accepts the challenge."
"Alas, poor Romeo! He is already dead, stabbed with a white wench’s black eye, shot through the ear with a love song, the very pin of his heart cleft with the blind bow-boy’s butt shaft. And is he a man to encounter Tybalt?","Oh, poor Romeo! He’s already dead. He’s been stabbed by a white girl’s black eye. He’s been cut through the ear with a love song. The center of his heart has been split by blind Cupid’s arrow. Is he man enough at this point to face off with Tybalt?"
"Why, what is Tybalt?","Why, what’s Tybalt’s story?"
"More than Prince of Cats. Oh, he’s the courageous captain of compliments. He fights as you sing prick-song, keeps time, distance, and proportion. He rests his minim rests—one, two, and the third in your bosom. The very butcher of a silk button, a duelist, a duelist, a gentleman of the very first house of the first and second cause. Ah, the immortal passado, the punto reverso, the hai!","He’s tougher than the Prince of Cats The Prince of Cats is a figure from Medieval lore whose first name was also Tybalt. Prince of Cats . He does everything by the book. He fights like you sing at a recital, paying attention to time, distance, and proportion. He takes the proper breaks: one, two, and the third in your heart. He’s the butcher who can hit any silk button. A master of duels. He’s a gentleman from the finest school of fencing. He knows how to turn any argument into a swordfight. He knows Mercutio lists Italian terms for fencing moves. He knows passado—the forward thrust—the punto reverso—the backhand thrust—and the hai—the thrust that goes straight through."
The what?,He knows what?
"The pox of such antic, lisping, affecting fantasmines, these new tuners of accents! “By Jesu, a very good blade! A very tall man! A very good whore!” Why, is not this a lamentable thing, grandsire, that we should be thus afflicted with these strange flies, these fashion-mongers, these “pardon me’s,” who stand so much on the new form, that they cannot sit at ease on the old bench? Oh, their bones, their bones!","I hate these crazy, affected guys who use foreign phrases and newfangled expressions. I hate their strange manners and their weird accents! I hate it when they say, “By Jesus, this is a very good blade, a very brave man, a very good whore.” Isn’t this a sad thing, my good man? Why should we put up with these foreign buzzards, these fashionmongers, these guys who say “pardon me,” these guys who care so much about manners that they can’t kick back on a bench without whining? “Oh, my aching bones!”"
"Here comes Romeo, here comes Romeo.","Here comes Romeo, here comes Romeo!"
"Without his roe, like a dried herring. O flesh, flesh, how art thou fishified! Now is he for the numbers that Petrarch flowed in. Laura to his lady was but a kitchen-wench— marry, she had a better love to berhyme her—Dido a dowdy, Cleopatra a gypsy, Helen and Hero hildings and harlots, Thisbe a grey eye or so, but not to the purpose.— Signior Romeo, bonjour! There’s a French salutation to your French slop. You gave us the counterfeit fairly last night.","He looks skinny, like a dried herring without its eggs, and he hasn’t got his girl. O flesh, flesh, you’ve turned pale and weak like a fish. Now he’s ready for Petrarch’s Mercutio teases Romeo by alluding to the poet Petrarch and six mythical and historical women who inspired love poetry. Petrarch’s poetry. Compared to Romeo’s girl, Laura was a kitchen slave. Surely she has a better love to make rhymes for her. Dido was shabbily dressed. Cleopatra was a gypsy girl. Helen and Hero were sluts and harlots. Thisbe might have had a blue eye or two, but that doesn’t matter. Signor Romeo, bonjour. There’s a French greeting that matches your drooping French-style pants. You faked us out pretty good last night."
Good morrow to you both. What counterfeit did I give you?,Good morning to you both. What do you mean I faked you out?
"The slip, sir, the slip. Can you not conceive?","You gave us the slip, sir, the slip. Can’t you understand what I’m saying?"
"Pardon, good Mercutio, my business was great, and in such a case as mine a man may strain courtesy.","Excuse me, good Mercutio. I had very important business to take care of. It was so important that I had to forget about courtesy and good manners."
"That’s as much as to say, such a case as yours constrains a man to bow in the hams.",In other words “important business” made you flex your buttocks Mercutio implies Romeo’s business was sexual. flex your buttocks .
Meaning “to curtsy”?,You mean do a curtsy?
Thou hast most kindly hit it.,"You’ve hit the target This is sexual double entedre. target , sir."
A most courteous exposition.,That’s a very polite and courteous explanation.
"Nay, I am the very pink of courtesy.","Yes, I am the pink flower—the master, of courtesy and manners."
Pink for flower.,The pink flower “Pink flower” suggests the female genitalia. pink flower .
Right.,Right.
"Why, then is my pump well flowered.","Well, then my pump Romeo plays along: pump= shoe and penis. pump is well decorated with flowers."
"Sure wit, follow me this jest now till thou hast worn out thy pump, that when the single sole of it is worn, the jest may remain, after the wearing solely singular.","Alright my witty friend, this joke has worn out your pump. Its thin skin is all worn out. The joke is all you have left."
"O single-soled jest, solely singular for the singleness.",This is a bad joke. It’s all silliness.
"Come between us, good Benvolio. My wits faints.","Come break this up, Benvolio. I’m losing this duel of wits."
"Switch and spurs, switch and spurs, or I’ll cry a match.","Keep going, keep going, or I’ll declare myself the winner."
"Nay, if our wits run the wild-goose chase, I am done, for thou hast more of the wild-goose in one of thy wits than, I am sure, I have in my whole five. Was I with you there for the goose?","Now, if our jokes go on a wild-goose chase, I’m finished. You have more wild goose in one of your jokes than I have in five of mine. Was I even close to you in the chase for the goose?"
Thou wast never with me for anything when thou wast not there for the goose.,You were never with me for anything if you weren’t there for the goose. Romeo implies that Mercutio is only good for jokes.
I will bite thee by the ear for that jest.,I’ll bite you on the ear for that joke.
"Nay, good goose, bite not.","No, good goose, don’t bite me."
Thy wit is a very bitter sweeting. It is a most sharp sauce.,Your joke is a very bitter apple. Your humor is a spicy sauce.
And is it not well served into a sweet goose?,Then isn’t it just the right dish for a sweet goose?
"Oh, here’s a wit of cheveril, that stretches from an inch narrow to an ell broad!","Oh, that’s a joke made out of leather that spreads itself thin, from the width of an inch to as fat as a yard."
"I stretch it out for that word “broad,” which, added to the goose, proves thee far and wide a broad goose.","I stretch my joke for that word “fat.” If you add that word to the word “goose,” it shows that you are a fat goose."
"Why, is not this better now than groaning for love? Now art thou sociable. Now art thou Romeo. Now art thou what thou art—by art as well as by nature, for this driveling love is like a great natural that runs lolling up and down to hide his bauble in a hole.","Why, isn’t all this joking better than groaning about love? Now you’re sociable. Now you’re Romeo. Now you are what you’ve learned to be and what you are naturally. This love of yours was like a blithering idiot who runs up and down looking for a hole to hide his toy Toy = a double entendre for penis toy in."
"Stop there, stop there.","Stop there, stop there."
Thou desirest me to stop in my tale against the hair.,You want me to stop my tale Tale = a double entendre for penis tale before I’m done.
Thou wouldst else have made thy tale large.,Otherwise your tale would have gotten too long.
"Oh, thou art deceived. I would have made it short, for I was come to the whole depth of my tale, and meant, indeed, to occupy the argument no longer.","Oh, you’re wrong. I would have made it short. I had come to the deepest part of my tale, and I planned to say nothing more on the topic."
Here’s goodly gear.,Here’s something good.
"A sail, a sail!","A sail, a sail! Benvolio makes the cry of a sailor who spots another ship on the horizon because the nurse is fat and sily-looking. A sail, a sail!"
"Two, two—a shirt and a smock.",There’s two—a man and a woman.
Peter!,Peter!
Anon!,I’m at your service.
"My fan, Peter.","Give me my fan, Peter."
"Good, Peter, to hide her face, for her fan’s the fairer face.","Good Peter, give her her fan to hide her face. Her fan is prettier than her face."
"God ye good morrow, gentlemen.","Good morning, gentlemen."
"God ye good e'en, fair gentlewoman.","Good afternoon, fair lady."
Is it good e'en?,Is it now afternoon?
"'Tis no less, I tell you, for the bawdy hand of the dial is now upon the prick of noon.","It’s not earlier than that, I tell you. The lusty hand Again, Mercutio’s language is full of offensive sexual innuendo. lusty hand of the clock is now pricking noon."
Out upon you! What a man are you?,Get out of here! What kind of man are you?
"One, gentlewoman, that God hath made, himself to mar.","I’m a man, my lady, that God has made for himself to ruin."
"By my troth, it is well said. “For himself to mar,” quoth he? Gentlemen, can any of you tell me where I may find the young Romeo?","I swear, you speak the truth. “For himself to ruin,” he says. Gentlemen, can any of you tell me where I can find young Romeo?"
"I can tell you, but young Romeo will be older when you have found him than he was when you sought him. I am the youngest of that name, for fault of a worse.","I can tell you, but young Romeo will be older when you find him than he was when you started looking for him. I am the youngest man by that name, because there is no one younger, or worse."
You say well.,You speak well.
"Yea, is the worst well? Very well took, i' faith, wisely, wisely.","Is the worst well? Very well taken, I believe, very wise."
"If you be he, sir, I desire some confidence with you.","(to ROMEO) If you’re the Romeo I’m looking for, sir, I would like to have a confidence The nurse means “conference,” not confidence. This is a joke called a malapropism, where the right word is replaced by a similar-sounding word with a completely different meaning. confidence with you."
She will indite him to some supper.,She will indite Bevolio makes fun of the Nurse by saying “indite” instead of “invite.” indite him to some dinner party.
"A bawd, a bawd, a bawd! So ho!",A pimp! A pimp! A pimp! I’ve found it out.
What hast thou found?,What have you found out?
"No hare, sir, unless a hare, sir, in a Lenten pie—that is, something stale and hoar ere it be spent.",She’s not a prostitute unless she’s using her ugliness to hide her promiscuity.
"(sings) An old hare hoar, And an old hare hoar, Is very good meat in Lent. But a hare that is hoar Is too much for a score When it hoars ere it be spent.","(he walks by them and sings) Old rabbit meat is good to eat, If you can’t get anything else. But if it’s so old, That it goes bad before you eat it, Then it was a waste of money. (speaking)"
"Romeo, will you come to your father’s? We’ll to dinner, thither.","Romeo, are you going to your father’s for lunch? Let’s go there."
I will follow you.,I’ll follow after you.
"Farewell, ancient lady. Farewell, lady, lady, lady.","Goodbye, old lady. Goodbye, lady, lady, lady. Mercutio mockingly sings a romantic song to the Nurse. Goodbye, old lady. Goodbye, lady, lady, lady."
"I pray you, sir, what saucy merchant was this that was so full of his ropery?","Please tell me, sir, who was that foulmouthed punk who was so full of crude jokes?"
"A gentleman, Nurse, that loves to hear himself talk, and will speak more in a minute than he will stand to in a month.","Nurse, he’s a man who likes to hear the sound of his own voice. He says more in one minute than he does in a whole month."
"An he speak any thing against me, I’ll take him down, an he were lustier than he is, and twenty such Jacks. And if I cannot, I’ll find those that shall. Scurvy knave! I am none of his flirt-gills. I am none of his skains-mates. (to PETER) And thou must stand by, too, and suffer every knave to use me at his pleasure?","If he says anything against me, I’ll humble him, even if he were stronger than he is—and twenty punks like him. If I can’t do it myself, I’ll find someone who can. That dirty rat! I’m not one of his sluts. I’m not one of his punk friends who carries a knife. (to PETER) And you just stand there letting every jerk make fun of me for kicks."
"I saw no man use you at his pleasure. If I had, my weapon should quickly have been out, I warrant you. I dare draw as soon as another man if I see occasion in a good quarrel and the law on my side.","I didn’t see anybody use you for kicks. If I had seen something like that, I would have quickly pulled out my weapon. Believe me, I’ll draw my sword as quick as any other man if I see a fight starting and the law is on my side."
"Now, afore God, I am so vexed that every part about me quivers. Scurvy knave! (to ROMEO) Pray you, sir, a word. And as I told you, my young lady bid me inquire you out. What she bade me say, I will keep to myself. But first let me tell ye, if ye should lead her into a fool’s paradise, as they say, it were a very gross kind of behavior, as they say. For the gentlewoman is young, and therefore, if you should deal double with her, truly it were an ill thing to be offered to any gentlewoman, and very weak dealing.","Now, I swear, I’m so angry that I’m shaking all over. That rotten scoundrel! (to ROMEO) Now, please, may I have a word with you, sir? My young mistress asked me to find you. What she asked me to say I’ll keep to myself. But let me tell you this first. If you lead her into a fool’s paradise, as the saying goes, it would be an outrageous crime because the girl is so young. And if you try to trick her, it would be an evil thing to do to any woman and very poor behavior."
"Nurse, commend me to thy lady and mistress. I protest unto thee—","Nurse, give my regards to to your lady. I swear to you—"
"Good heart, and i' faith, I will tell her as much. Lord, Lord, she will be a joyful woman.","You have a good heart, and believe me, I’ll tell her that. Lord, Lord, she’ll be a happy woman."
"What wilt thou tell her, Nurse? Thou dost not mark me.","What are you going to tell her, Nurse? You’re not paying attention to me."
"I will tell her, sir, that you do protest, which, as I take it, is a gentlemanlike offer.","Sir, I’ll tell her that you protest Here the Nurse makes another malapropism, saying “protest” when she means “propose.”. protest to her, which I think is the gentlemanly thing to do.."
Bid her devise And there she shall at Friar Lawrence' cell Be shrived and married. (gives her coins) Here is for thy pains.,Tell her to devise a plan to get out of her house and come to confession at the abbey this afternoon. At Friar Lawrence’s cell she can make confession and be married. (giving her coins) Here is a reward for your efforts.
"No, truly, sir. Not a penny.","No, really, I won’t take a penny."
Go to. I say you shall.,"Go on, I insist you take it."
"(takes the money) This afternoon, sir? Well, she shall be there.","(taking the money) This afternoon, sir? She’ll be there."
"And stay, good Nurse. Behind the abbey wall Within this hour my man shall be with thee And bring thee cords made like a tackled stair, Which to the high top-gallant of my joy Farewell. Be trusty, and I’ll quit thy pains. Farewell. Commend me to thy mistress.","Wait good Nurse. Within an hour, one of my men will come to you behind the abbey wall and give you a rope ladder. I’ll use the rope ladder to climb over the walls at night. Then I’ll meet Juliet joyfully and in secret. Goodbye. Be honest and helpful, and I’ll repay you for your efforts. Goodbye. Sing my praises to your mistress."
"Now God in heaven bless thee! Hark you, sir.","May God in heaven bless you. Now please listen, sir."
"What sayst thou, my dear Nurse?","What do you have to say, my dear Nurse?"
"“Two may keep counsel, putting one away”?","Can your man keep a secret? Haven’t you ever heard the saying, “Two can conspire to put one away”?"
"Warrant thee, my man’s as true as steel.","I assure you, my man is as true as steel."
"Well, sir, my mistress is the sweetest lady.—Lord, Lord! when ’twas a little prating thing.—Oh, there is a nobleman in town, one Paris, that would fain lay knife aboard, but she, good soul, had as lief see a toad, a very toad, as see him. I anger her sometimes and tell her that Paris is the properer man. But, I’ll warrant you, when I say so, she looks as pale as any clout in the versal world. Doth not rosemary and Romeo begin both with a letter?","Well, sir, my mistress is the sweetest lady. Lord, Lord, when she was a little baby—Oh, there is one nobleman in the city, a guy named Paris, who would be happy to claim her as his own. Juliet would rather look at a toad than at him. I make her angry sometimes by saying that Paris is more handsome than you are. But when I say so, I swear she turns white as a sheet. Don’t “ rosemary Rosemary was a token of remembrance between lovers and for the dead. rosemary ” and “Romeo” begin with the same letter?"
"Ay, Nurse, what of that? Both with an R.","Yes, Nurse, what about that? They both begin with the letter “R.”"
"Ah, mocker, that’s the dog’s name. R is for the—No, I know it begins with some other letter, and she hath the prettiest sententious of it, of you and rosemary, that it would do you good to hear it.","Ah, you jokester—that’s the dog’s name. “R” is for the—no, I know it begins with another letter. She says the most beautiful things about you and rosemary. It would be good for you to hear the things she says."
Commend me to thy lady.,Give my compliments to your lady.
"Ay, a thousand times.—Peter!","Yes, a thousand times. Peter!"
Anon!,I’m ready.
Before and apace.,(giving PETER her fan) Go ahead. Go quickly.
"The clock struck nine when I did send the Nurse. In half an hour she promised to return. Perchance she cannot meet him. That’s not so. Oh, she is lame! Love’s heralds should be thoughts, Driving back shadows over louring hills. Therefore do nimble-pinioned doves draw love And therefore hath the wind-swift Cupid wings. Now is the sun upon the highmost hill Is three long hours, yet she is not come. Had she affections and warm youthful blood, She would be as swift in motion as a ball. My words would bandy her to my sweet love, But old folks, many feign as they were dead, Unwieldy, slow, heavy, and pale as lead.","I sent the Nurse at nine o'clock. Maybe she can’t find him. That can’t be. Oh, she’s slow! Love’s messengers should be thoughts, which fly ten times faster than sunbeams. They should be strong enough to push shadows over the dark hills. That’s the way doves carry Venus so fast, and that’s why Cupid has wings that let him fly as fast as the wind. Now it’s noon. That’s three hours since nine o'clock, but she hasn’t come back. If she was young and passionate, she’d move as fast as a ball. My words would bounce her to my sweet love, and his words would bounce her back to me. But a lot of old people act like they’re already dead—sluggish, slow, fat, and colorless, like lead."
"O God, she comes.—O honey Nurse, what news? Hast thou met with him? Send thy man away.","Oh my God, here she comes! Oh sweet Nurse, what news do you bring? Have you spoken to him? Send your man away."
"Peter, stay at the gate.","Peter, wait for me at the gate."
"Now, good sweet Nurse— O Lord, why look’st thou sad? Though news be sad, yet tell them merrily. If good, thou shamest the music of sweet news By playing it to me with so sour a face.","Now, good sweet Nurse—Oh Lord, why do you look so sad? Even if the news is sad, tell me with a smile on your face. If the news is good, you’re ruining the sweet news by playing a trick with a sour face like that."
"Fie, how my bones ache! What a jaunt have I!","I am tired. Leave me alone for a minute. Oh my, my bones ache so much. I’ve been running all over the place."
"I would thou hadst my bones and I thy news. Nay, come, I pray thee, speak. Good, good Nurse, speak.","I wish you had my bones, and I had your news. Come on now, I beg you, speak, good Nurse, speak."
"Jesu, what haste! Can you not stay awhile?","Sweet Jesus, you’re in such a hurry! Can’t you wait for a moment? Don’t you see that I’m out of breath?"
"How art thou out of breath when thou hast breath To say to me that thou art out of breath? The excuse that thou dost make in this delay Is longer than the tale thou dost excuse. Say either, and I’ll stay the circumstance. Let me be satisfied. Is ’t good or bad?","How can you be out of breath when you have enough breath to tell me that you’re out of breath? The excuse you make to delay the news is longer than the news itself. Is the news good or bad? Answer that question. Tell me if it’s good or bad, and I’ll wait for the details. Tell me so I can be satisfied. Is it good or bad?"
"Well, you have made a simple choice. You know not how to choose a man. Romeo! No, not he, though his face be better than any man’s, yet his leg excels all men’s, and for a hand and a foot and a body, though they be not to be talked on, yet they are past compare. He is not the flower of courtesy, but, I’ll warrant him, as gentle as a lamb. Go thy ways, wench. Serve God. What, have you dined at home?","Well, you have made a foolish choice. You don’t know how to pick a man. Romeo? No, not him, though his face is more handsome than any man’s, and his legs are prettier, and as for his hands and feet and body, they’re not much to speak of, and yet they’re beyond compare. He’s not the most polite man in the world, but, believe me, he’s gentle as a lamb. Well, do what you want. Be good. Have you had lunch yet?"
"No, no. But all this did I know before.","No, I haven’t had lunch. Everything you told me I already knew. What does he say about our marriage? What about that?"
"Lord, how my head aches! What a head have I! It beats as it would fall in twenty pieces. My back a' t' other side. Ah, my back, my back! Beshrew your heart for sending me about,","Lord, what a headache I’ve got! My head is pounding. It feels like it’ll break into twenty pieces. My back aches too—(JULIET rubs her back) Ooh, on the other side—ah, my poor aching back! Curse your heart for sending me running all over town. I could get sick and die."
"I' faith, I am sorry that thou art not well. Sweet, sweet, sweet Nurse, tell me, what says my love?","Believe me, I’m sorry you’re in pain. Sweet, sweet, sweet Nurse, tell me, what did my love Romeo say?"
"Your love says, like an honest gentleman, and a courteous, and a kind, and a handsome, and, I warrant, a virtuous— Where is your mother?","Your love says, like an honorable gentleman, who is courteous, kind, handsome, and, I believe, virtuous— where is your mother?"
"Where is my mother? Why, she is within. Where should she be? How oddly thou repliest! “Your love says, like an honest gentleman, 'Where is your mother?'”","Where is my mother? Why, she’s inside. Where else would she be? Your answer is so strange! “Your love says, like an honorable gentleman, 'Where is your mother?'”"
"O God’s lady dear, Is this the poultice for my aching bones? Henceforward do your messages yourself.","Oh holy Mary, mother of God! Are you this impatient? Come on, you’re being ridiculous! Is this the cure for my aching bones? From now on, take care of your messages yourself."
"Here’s such a coil. Come, what says Romeo?","You’re making such a fuss. Come on, what did Romeo say?"
Have you got leave to go to shrift today?,Do you have permission to go out and take confession today?
I have.,I do.
"Then hie you hence to Friar Lawrence’s cell. There stays a husband to make you a wife. Now comes the wanton blood up in your cheeks. They’ll be in scarlet straight at any news. To fetch a ladder, by the which your love Must climb a bird’s nest soon when it is dark. I am the drudge and toil in your delight, But you shall bear the burden soon at night.",Then hurry up and rush over to Friar Lawrence’s cell. There’s a husband there who’s waiting to make you his wife. Now I see the blood rushing to your cheeks. You blush bright red as soon as you hear any news. Go to the church. I must go by a different path to get a rope ladder. Your love will use it to climb up to your window while it’s dark. I do the drudge work for your pleasure. But soon you’ll be doing a wife’s work all night long. Go. I’ll go to lunch. You go to Friar Lawrence’s cell.
"Hie to high fortune! Honest Nurse, farewell.","Wish me luck. Thank you, dear Nurse."
So smile the heavens upon this holy act That after-hours with sorrow chide us not.,"May the heavens be happy with this holy act of marriage, so nothing unfortunate happens later to make us regret it."
"Amen, amen. But come what sorrow can, It cannot countervail the exchange of joy Do thou but close our hands with holy words, Then love-devouring death do what he dare; It is enough I may but call her mine.","Amen, amen. But whatever misfortunes occur, they can’t ruin the joy I feel with one look at her. All you have to do is join our hands with holy words, then love-destroying death can do whatever it pleases. It’s enough for me if I can call her mine."
"These violent delights have violent ends Which, as they kiss, consume. The sweetest honey Is loathsome in his own deliciousness And in the taste confounds the appetite. Therefore love moderately. Long love doth so.","These sudden joys have sudden endings. They burn up in victory like fire and gunpowder. When they meet, as in a kiss, they explode. Too much honey is delicious, but it makes you sick to your stomach. Therefore, love each other in moderation. That is the key to long-lasting love. Too fast is as bad as too slow."
"Here comes the lady. Oh, so light a foot Will ne'er wear out the everlasting flint. A lover may bestride the gossamers That idles in the wanton summer air,","Here comes the lady. Oh,a footstep as light as hers will never endure the rocky road of life. Lovers are so light they can walk on a spiderweb floating on a summer breeze, and yet not fall. That’s how flimsy and unreal pleasure is."
Good even to my ghostly confessor.,"Good evening, my spiritual confessor."
"Romeo shall thank thee, daughter, for us both.","Romeo will thank you, my girl, for both of us."
"As much to him, else is his thanks too much.","I’ll give him equal thanks, so we’re even."
"Ah, Juliet, if the measure of thy joy To blazon it, then sweeten with thy breath This neighbor air, and let rich music’s tongue Unfold the imagined happiness that both Receive in either by this dear encounter.","Ah, Juliet if you’re as happy as I am, and you’re better with words, tell me about the happiness you imagine we’ll have in our marriage."
"Brags of his substance, not of ornament. They are but beggars that can count their worth. But my true love is grown to such excess I cannot sum up sum of half my wealth.",I can imagine more than I can say—I have more on my mind than words. Anyone who can count how much he has is poor. My true love has made me so rich that I can’t count even half of my wealth.
"For, by your leaves, you shall not stay alone Till holy church incorporate two in one.","Come, come with me, and we’ll do the job quickly. Because if you don’t mind, I’m not leaving you two alone until you’re united in marriage."
"I pray thee, good Mercutio, let’s retire. The day is hot; the Capulets, abroad; And if we meet we shall not ’scape a brawl, For now, these hot days, is the mad blood stirring.","I’m begging you, good Mercutio, let’s call it a day. It’s hot outside, and the Capulets are wandering around. If we bump into them, we’ll certainly get into a fight. When it’s hot outside, people become angry and hot-blooded."
"Thou art like one of those fellows that, when he enters the confines of a tavern, claps me his sword upon the table and says “God send me no need of thee!” and, by the operation of the second cup, draws it on the drawer when indeed there is no need.","You’re like one of those guys who walks into a bar, slams his sword on the table, and then says, “I pray I never have to use you.” By the time he orders his second drink, he pulls his sword on the bartender for no reason at all."
Am I like such a fellow?,Am I really like one of those guys?
"Come, come, thou art as hot a Jack in thy mood as any in Italy, and as soon moved to be moody, and as soon moody to be moved.","Come on, you can be as angry as any guy in Italy when you’re in the mood. When someone does the smallest thing to make you angry, you get angry. And when you’re in the mood to get angry, you find something to get angry about."
And what to?,And what about that?
"Nay, an there were two such, we should have none shortly, for one would kill the other. Thou, why, thou wilt quarrel with a man that hath a hair more or a hair less in his beard than thou hast. Thou wilt quarrel with a man for cracking nuts, having no other reason but because thou hast hazel eyes. What eye but such an eye would spy out such a quarrel? Thy head is as full of quarrels as an egg is full of meat, and yet thy head hath been beaten as addle as an egg for quarreling. Thou hast quarreled with a man for coughing in the street because he hath wakened thy dog that hath lain asleep in the sun. Didst thou not fall out with a tailor for wearing his new doublet before Easter? With another, for tying his new shoes with old ribbon? And yet thou wilt tutor me from quarreling!","If there were two men like you, pretty soon there’d be none because the two of you would kill each other. You would fight with a man if he had one more whisker or one less whisker in his beard than you have in your beard. You’ll fight with a man who’s cracking nuts just because you have hazelnut-colored eyes. Only you would look for a fight like that. Your head is as full of fights as an egg is full of yolk, but your head has been beaten like scrambled eggs from so much fighting. You started a fight with a man who coughed in the street because he woke up a dog that was sleeping in the sun. Didn’t you argue it out with your tailor for wearing one of his new suits before the right season? And with another for tying the new shoes he made with old laces? And yet you’re the one who wants to teach me about restraint!"
"An I were so apt to quarrel as thou art, any man should buy the fee simple of my life for an hour and a quarter.","If I were in the habit of fighting the way you are, my life insurance rates would be sky high."
The fee simple? O simple!,Your life insurance? That’s foolish.
"By my head, here comes the Capulets.","Oh great, here come the Capulets."
"By my heel, I care not.","Well, well, I don’t care."
"Follow me close, for I will speak to them.","(to PETRUCCIO and others) Follow me closely, I’ll talk to them. (to the MONTAGUES) Good afternoon, gentlemen. I’d like to have a word with one of you."
And but one word with one of us? Couple it with something. Make it a word and a blow.,You just want one word with one of us? Put it together with something else. Make it a word and a blow.
"You shall find me apt enough to that, sir, an you will give me occasion.","You’ll find me ready enough to do that, sir, if you give me a reason."
Could you not take some occasion without giving?,Can’t you find a reason without my giving you one?
"Mercutio, thou consort’st with Romeo.","Mercutio, you hang out with Romeo."
"Consort? What, dost thou make us minstrels? An thou make minstrels of us, look to hear nothing but discords. Here’s my fiddlestick. Here’s that shall make you dance. Zounds, “consort”!","“Hang out?” Who do you think we are, musicians in a band? If we look like musicians to you, you can expect to hear nothing but noise. (touching the blade of his sword) This is my fiddlestick. I’ll use it to make you dance. Goddammit—“Hang out!”"
"We talk here in the public haunt of men. Either withdraw unto some private place, And reason coldly of your grievances, Or else depart. Here all eyes gaze on us.","We’re talking here in a public place. Either go someplace private, or talk it over rationally, or else just go away. Out here everybody can see us."
"I will not budge for no man’s pleasure, I.","Men’s eyes were made to see things, so let them watch. I won’t move to please anybody."
"Well, peace be with you, sir. Here comes my man.","Well, may peace be with you. Here comes my man, the man I’m looking for."
"But I’ll be hanged, sir, if he wear your livery. Marry, go before to field, he’ll be your follower.","He’s not your man. Alright, walk out into a field, and he’ll chase you. In that sense you can call him your “man.”"
"Romeo, the love I bear thee can afford No better term than this: thou art a villain.","Romeo, there’s only one thing I can call you. You’re a villain."
"Tybalt, the reason that I have to love thee Doth much excuse the appertaining rage Therefore, farewell. I see thou know’st me not.","Tybalt, I have a reason to love you that lets me put aside the rage I should feel and excuse that insult. I am no villain. So, goodbye. I can tell that you don’t know who I am."
"Boy, this shall not excuse the injuries That thou hast done me. Therefore turn and draw.","Boy, your words can’t excuse the harm you’ve done to me. So now turn and draw your sword."
"I do protest I never injured thee, Till thou shalt know the reason of my love. And so, good Capulet—which name I tender As dearly as my own—be satisfied.","I disagree. I’ve never done you harm. I love you more than you can understand until you know the reason why I love you. And so, good Capulet—which is a name I love like my own name—you should be satisfied with what I say."
"O calm dishonourable, vile submission! Tybalt, you ratcatcher, will you walk?","This calm submission is dishonorable and vile. The thrust of a sword will end this surrender. (draws his sword)Tybalt, you rat-catcher, will you go fight me?"
What wouldst thou have with me?,What do you want from me?
"Good King of Cats, nothing but one of your nine lives, that I mean to make bold withal, and, as you shall use me hereafter, dry-beat the rest of the eight. Will you pluck your sword out of his pilcher by the ears? Make haste, lest mine be about your ears ere it be out.","Good King of Cats, I want to take one of your nine lives. I’ll take one, and, depending on how you treat me after that, I might beat the other eight out of you too. Will you pull your sword out of its sheath? Hurry up, or I’ll smack you on the ears with my sword before you have yours drawn."
I am for you. (draws his sword),I’ll fight you. (he draws his sword)
"Gentle Mercutio, put thy rapier up.","Noble Mercutio, put your sword away."
"Come, sir, your passado.","(to TYBALT) Come on, sir, perform your forward thrust, your passado."
"(draws his sword) Draw, Benvolio. Beat down their weapons. Gentlemen, for shame! Forbear this outrage. Tybalt, Mercutio! The Prince expressly hath Hold, Tybalt! Good Mercutio!","(drawing his sword) Draw your sword, Benvolio. Let’s beat down their weapons. Gentlemen, stop this disgraceful fight. Tybalt, Mercutio, the Prince has banned fighting in the streets of Verona. Stop, Tybalt. Stop, good Mercutio."
"Away, Tybalt.","Let’s get away, Tybalt."
I am hurt. A plague o' both your houses! I am sped.,I’ve been hurt. May a plague curse both your families. I’m finished. Did he get away clean?
"What, art thou hurt?","What, are you hurt?"
"Ay, ay, a scratch, a scratch. Marry, ’tis enough. Where is my page?—Go, villain, fetch a surgeon.","Yes, yes. It’s a scratch, just a scratch. But it’s enough. Where is my page? Go, boy. Get me a doctor."
"Courage, man. The hurt cannot be much.","Have courage, man. The wound can’t be that bad."
"No, ’tis not so deep as a well nor so wide as a church-door, but ’tis enough, ’twill serve. Ask for me tomorrow, and you shall find me a grave man. I am peppered, I warrant, for this world. A plague o' both your houses! Zounds, a dog, a rat, a mouse, a cat to scratch a man to death! A braggart, a rogue, a villain that fights by the book of arithmetic! Why the devil came you between us? I was hurt under your arm.","No, it’s not as deep as a well, or as wide as a church door, but it’s enough. It’ll do the job. Ask for me tomorrow, and you’ll find me in a grave. I’m done for in this world, I believe. May a plague strike both your houses. Goddammit! I can’t believe that dog, that rat, that mouse, that cat could scratch me to death! That braggart, punk villain who fights like he learned swordsmanship from a manual! Why the hell did you come in between us? He struck me from under your arm."
I thought all for the best.,I thought it was the right thing to do.
"Help me into some house, Benvolio, Or I shall faint. A plague o' both your houses! They have made worms' meat of me. I have it,","Take me inside some house, Benvolio, or I’ll pass out. May a plague strike both your families! They’ve turned me into food for worms. I’m done for. Curse your families!"
"This gentleman, the Prince’s near ally, My very friend, hath got his mortal hurt In my behalf. My reputation stained With Tybalt’s slander.—Tybalt, that an hour Thy beauty hath made me effeminate And in my temper softened valor’s steel!","This gentleman Mercutio, a close relative of the Prince and my dear friend, was killed while defending me from Tybalt’s slander—Tybalt, who had been my cousin for a whole hour! Oh, sweet Juliet, your beauty has made me weak like a woman, and you have softened my bravery, which before was as hard as steel."
"O Romeo, Romeo, brave Mercutio is dead! That gallant spirit hath aspired the clouds,","Oh Romeo, Romeo, brave Mercutio is dead! His brave spirit has floated up to heaven, but it was too early for him to leave life on earth."
This day’s black fate on more days doth depend. This but begins the woe others must end.,The future will be affected by today’s terrible events. Today is the start of a terror that will end in the days ahead.
Here comes the furious Tybalt back again.,Here comes the furious Tybalt back again.
"Alive in triumph—and Mercutio slain! And fire-eyed fury be my conduct now. Now, Tybalt, take the “villain” back again That late thou gavest me, for Mercutio’s soul Is but a little way above our heads, Either thou or I, or both, must go with him.","He’s alive and victorious, and Mercutio’s dead? Enough with mercy and consideration. It’s time for rage to guide my actions. Now, Tybalt, you can call me “villain” the way you did before. Mercutio’s soul is floating right above our heads. He’s waiting for you to keep him company on the way up to heaven. Either you, or I, or both of us have to go with him."
"Thou, wretched boy, that didst consort him here Shalt with him hence.","Wretched boy, you hung out with him here, and you’re going to go to heaven with him."
This shall determine that.,This fight will decide who dies.
"Romeo, away, be gone! Stand not amazed. The Prince will doom thee death If thou art taken. Hence, be gone, away!","Romeo, get out of here. The citizens are around, and Tybalt is dead. Don’t stand there shocked. The Prince will give you the death penalty if you get caught. So get out of here!"
"Oh, I am fortune’s fool!","Oh, I have awful luck."
Why dost thou stay?,Why are you waiting?
Which way ran he that killed Mercutio?,"The man who killed Mercutio, which way did he go? Tybalt, that murderer, which way did he run?"
There lies that Tybalt.,Tybalt is lying over there.
"(to TYBALT) Up, sir, go with me. I charge thee in the Prince’s name, obey.","(to TYBALT) Get up, sir, and come with me. I command you, by the authority of the Prince, to obey me."
Where are the vile beginners of this fray?,Where are the evil men who started this fight?
"The unlucky manage of this fatal brawl. There lies the man, slain by young Romeo, That slew thy kinsman, brave Mercutio.","Oh, noble prince, I can tell you everything about the unfortunate circumstances of this deadly fight. Over there Tybalt is lying dead. He killed your relative, brave Mercutio, and then young Romeo killed him."
"Tybalt, my cousin! O my brother’s child! Of my dear kinsman! Prince, as thou art true, For blood of ours shed blood of Montague. O cousin, cousin!","Tybalt was my nephew! He was my brother’s son! Oh Prince, oh nephew, oh husband! Oh, my nephew is dead! Oh Prince, as you are a man of honor, take revenge for this murder by killing someone from the Montague family. Oh cousin, cousin!"
"Benvolio, who began this bloody fray?","Benvolio, who started this fight?"
"Tybalt here slain, whom Romeo’s hand did slay. How nice the quarrel was and urged withal Your high displeasure. All this uttered With gentle breath, calm look, knees humbly bowed, Could not take truce with the unruly spleen With piercing steel at bold Mercutio’s breast, Who, all as hot, turns deadly point to point, And, with a martial scorn, with one hand beats Cold death aside and with the other sends Retorts it. Romeo, he cries aloud, “Hold, friends! Friends, part!” and, swifter than his tongue, His agile arm beats down their fatal points, And ’twixt them rushes—underneath whose arm Of stout Mercutio, and then Tybalt fled.","Tybalt started the fight before he was killed by Romeo. Romeo spoke to Tybalt politely and told him how silly this argument was. He mentioned that you would not approve of the fight. He said all of this gently and calmly, kneeling down out of respect. But he could not make peace with Tybalt, who was in an angry mood and wouldn’t listen to talk about peace. Tybalt and Mercutio began to fight each other fiercely, lunging at one another and dodging each other’s blows. Romeo cried out, “Stop, my friends. Break it up.” Then he jumped in between them and forced them to put their swords down. But Tybalt reached under Romeo’s arm and thrust his sword into brave Mercutio. Then Tybalt fled the scene."
"But by and by comes back to Romeo, Who had but newly entertained revenge, And to ’t they go like lightning, for ere I And, as he fell, did Romeo turn and fly. This is the truth, or let Benvolio die.","But pretty soon he came back to meet Romeo, who was overcome with the desire for revenge. As quick as lightning, they started fighting. Before I could break up the fight, Tybalt was killed. Romeo ran away when Tybalt fell dead. I’m telling you the truth, I swear on my life."
"He is a kinsman to the Montague. Affection makes him false. He speaks not true. And all those twenty could but kill one life. I beg for justice, which thou, Prince, must give. Romeo slew Tybalt. Romeo must not live.","Benvolio is part of the Montague family. His loyalties to the Montagues make him tell lies. He’s not telling the truth. There were twenty Montagues fighting in this awful riot, and together those twenty could only kill one man. I demand justice. You, Prince, are the man who can give me justice. Romeo killed Tybalt. Romeo must die."
Romeo slew him; he slew Mercutio.,Romeo killed Tybalt. Tybalt killed Mercutio. Who should now pay the price for Mercutio’s life?
"Not Romeo, Prince, he was Mercutio’s friend. His fault concludes but what the law should end, The life of Tybalt.","Not Romeo, Prince. He was Mercutio’s friend. His crime did justice’s job by taking Tybalt’s life."
"And for that offence Immediately we do exile him hence. My blood for your rude brawls doth lie a-bleeding. But I’ll amerce you with so strong a fine That you shall all repent the loss of mine. I will be deaf to pleading and excuses. Therefore use none. Let Romeo hence in haste, Else, when he’s found, that hour is his last. Bear hence this body and attend our will. Mercy but murders, pardoning those that kill.","And for that crime, Romeo is hereby exiled from Verona. I’m involved in your rivalry. Mercutio was my relative, and he lies dead because of your bloody feud. I’ll punish you so harshly that you’ll regret causing me this loss. I won’t listen to your pleas or excuses. You can’t get out of trouble by praying or crying, so don’t bother. Tell Romeo to leave the city immediately, or else, if he is found, he will be killed. Take away this body, and do what I say. Showing mercy by pardoning killers only causes more murders."
"Gallop apace, you fiery-footed steeds, Toward Phoebus' lodging. Such a wagoner As Phaeton would whip you to the west And bring in cloudy night immediately. That runaways' eyes may wink, and Romeo Leap to these arms, untalked of and unseen. Lovers can see to do their amorous rites By their own beauties, or, if love be blind, Thou sober-suited matron, all in black, And learn me how to lose a winning match Played for a pair of stainless maidenhoods. Hood my unmanned blood bating in my cheeks, Think true love acted simple modesty. Come, night. Come, Romeo. Come, thou day in night, For thou wilt lie upon the wings of night Whiter than new snow upon a raven’s back. Give me my Romeo. And when I shall die, Take him and cut him out in little stars, And he will make the face of heaven so fine That all the world will be in love with night Oh, I have bought the mansion of a love, But not possessed it, and though I am sold, Not yet enjoyed. So tedious is this day As is the night before some festival And may not wear them.","I wish the sun would hurry up and set and night would come immediately. When the night comes and everyone goes to sleep, Romeo will leap into my arms, and no one will know. Beauty makes it possible for lovers to see how to make love in the dark. Or else love is blind, and its best time is the night. I wish night would come, like a widow dressed in black, so I can learn how to submit to my husband and lose my virginity. Let the blood rushing to my cheeks be calmed. In the darkness, let me, a shy virgin, learn the strange act of sex so that it seems innocent, modest, and true. Come, night. Come, Romeo. You’re like a day that comes during the night. You’re whiter than snow on the black wings of a raven. Come, gentle night. Come, loving, dark night. Give me my Romeo. And when I die, turn him into stars and form a constellation in his image. His face will make the heavens so beautiful that the world will fall in love with the night and forget about the garish sun. Oh, I have bought love’s mansion, but I haven’t moved in yet.I belong to Romeo now, but he hasn’t taken possession of me yet. This day is so boring that I feel like a child on the night before a holiday, waiting to put on my fancy new clothes."
"Oh, here comes my Nurse, And she brings news, and every tongue that speaks But Romeo’s name speaks heavenly eloquence.— Now, Nurse, what news? What hast thou there? The cords","Oh, here comes my Nurse, and she brings news. Every voice that mentions Romeo’s name sounds beautiful. Now, Nurse, what’s the news? Is that the rope ladder Romeo told you to pick up?"
"Ay, ay, the cords.","Yes, yes, this is the rope ladder."
"Ay me, what news? Why dost thou wring thy hands?","Oh my, what’s the news? Why do you look so upset?"
"Ah, welladay! He’s dead, he’s dead, he’s dead! We are undone, lady, we are undone!","Oh, it’s a sad day! He’s dead. He’s dead. He’s dead! We’re ruined, lady, we’re ruined! What an awful day! He’s gone. He’s been killed. He’s dead!"
Can heaven be so envious?,Can God be so jealous and hateful?
"Romeo can, Though heaven cannot. O Romeo, Romeo! Who ever would have thought it? Romeo!","Romeo is hateful, even though God isn’t. Oh, Romeo, Romeo, who ever would have thought it would be Romeo?"
"What devil art thou that dost torment me thus? Hath Romeo slain himself? Say thou but “ay,” And that bare vowel I shall poison more Than the death-darting eye of cockatrice. I am not I if there be such an I, If he be slain, say “ay,” or if not, “no.” Brief sounds determine of my weal or woe.","What kind of devil are you to torture me like this? This is as bad as the tortures of hell. Has Romeo killed himself? Just say “Yes” and I will turn more poisonous than the snake with the evil eye. I will no longer be myself if you tell me Romeo killed himself. If he’s been killed, say “Yes.” If not, say “No.” These short words will determine my joy or my pain."
"I saw the wound, I saw it with mine eyes— God save the mark!—here on his manly breast. Pale, pale as ashes, all bedaubed in blood, All in gore blood. I swoonèd at the sight.","I saw the wound. I saw it with my own eyes. God bless that wound, here on his manly chest. A pitiful corpse, a bloody, pitiful corpse. Pale as ashes and drenched in blood. All the dried blood was so gory. I fainted when I saw it."
"O, break, my hear, poor bankrupt, break at once! To prison, eyes, ne'er look on liberty. And thou and Romeo press one heavy bier.","Oh, my heart is breaking. Oh, my bankrupt heart is breaking. I’ll send my eyes to prison, and they’ll never be free to look at anything again. I’ll give my vile body back to the earth. I’ll never move again. My body and Romeo’s will lie together in one sad coffin."
"O Tybalt, Tybalt, the best friend I had! O courteous Tybalt! Honest gentleman! That ever I should live to see thee dead.","Oh, Tybalt, Tybalt, he was the best friend I had. Oh, polite Tybalt, he was an honorable gentleman. I wish I had not lived long enough to see him die."
"Is Romeo slaughtered, and is Tybalt dead? My dearest cousin and my dearer lord? Then, dreadful trumpet, sound the general doom! For who is living if those two are gone?","What disaster is this? Has Romeo been killed, and is Tybalt dead too? Tybalt was my dearest cousin. Romeo was even dearer to me as my husband. Let the trumpets play the song of doom, because who can be alive if those two are gone?"
Romeo that killed him—he is banishèd.,"Tybalt is dead, and Romeo has been banished. Romeo killed Tybalt, and his punishment was banishment."
"O God, did Romeo’s hand shed Tybalt’s blood?","Oh God, did Romeo’s hand shed Tybalt’s blood?"
"It did, it did. Alas the day, it did.","It did, it did. Curse the day this happened, but it did."
"O serpent heart hid with a flowering face! Beautiful tyrant! Fiend angelical! Dove-feathered raven, wolvish-ravening lamb! Despisèd substance of divinest show, Just opposite to what thou justly seem’st. O nature, what hadst thou to do in hell When thou didst bower the spirit of a fiend In moral paradise of such sweet flesh? Was ever book containing such vile matter In such a gorgeous palace!","Oh, he’s like a snake disguised as a flower. Did a dragon ever hide in such a beautiful cave? He’s a beautiful tyrant and a fiendish angel! He’s a raven with the feathers of the dove. He’s a lamb who hunts like a wolf! I hate him, yet he seemed the most wonderful man. He’s turned out to be the exact opposite of what he seemed. He’s a saint who should be damned. He’s a villain who seemed honorable. Oh nature, what were you doing in hell? Why did you put the soul of a criminal in the perfect body of a man? Was there ever such an evil book with such a beautiful cover? Oh, I can’t believe the deepest evil lurked inside something so beautiful!"
"There’s no trust, No faith, no honesty in men. All perjured, All forsworn, all naught, all dissemblers. Ah, where’s my man?—Give me some aqua vitae.— Shame come to Romeo!","There is no trust, no faith, no honesty in men. All of them lie. All of them cheat. They’re all wicked. Ah, where’s my servant?—Give me some brandy.—These griefs, these pains, these sorrows make me old. Shame on Romeo!"
"Blistered be thy tongue For such a wish! He was not born to shame. Upon his brow shame is ashamed to sit, For ’tis a throne where honor may be crowned. Oh, what a beast was I to chide at him!","I hope sores cover your tongue for a wish like that! He was not born to be shameful. Shame does not belong with Romeo. He deserves only honor, complete honor. Oh, I was such a beast to be angry at him."
Will you speak well of him that killed your cousin?,Are you going to say good things about the man who killed your cousin?
"Shall I speak ill of him that is my husband? Ah, poor my lord, what tongue shall smooth thy name, But wherefore, villain, didst thou kill my cousin? That villain cousin would have killed my husband. Back, foolish tears, back to your native spring. Your tributary drops belong to woe, My husband lives, that Tybalt would have slain, And Tybalt’s dead, that would have slain my husband. All this is comfort. Wherefore weep I then? Some word there was, worser than Tybalt’s death, But oh, it presses to my memory, Like damnèd guilty deeds to sinners' minds. “Tybalt is dead, and Romeo banishèd.”","Am I supposed to say bad things about my own husband? Ah, my poor husband, who will sing your praises when I, your wife of three hours, have been saying awful things about you? But why, you villain, did you kill my cousin? Probably because my cousin the villain would have killed my husband. I’m not going to cry any tears. I would cry with joy that Romeo is alive, but I should cry tears of grief because Tybalt is dead. My husband, whom Tybalt wanted to kill, is alive. Tybalt, who wanted to kill my husband, is dead. All this is comforting news. Why, then, should I cry? There is news worse than the news that Tybalt is dead, news that makes me want to die. I would be glad to forget about it, but it weighs on my memory like sins linger in guilty minds. “Tybalt is dead, and Romeo has been banished.”"
"That “banishèd,” that one word “banishèd” Was woe enough, if it had ended there. Or, if sour woe delights in fellowship And needly will be ranked with other griefs, Why followed not, when she said “Tybalt’s dead,” Which modern lamentations might have moved? But with a rearward following Tybalt’s death, “Romeo is banishèd.” To speak that word, Is father, mother, Tybalt, Romeo, Juliet, There is no end, no limit, measure, bound, In that word’s death. No words can that woe sound. Where is my father and my mother, Nurse?","That banishment is worse than the murder of ten thousand Tybalts. Tybalt’s death would be bad enough if that was all. Maybe pain likes to have company and can’t come without bringing more pain. It would have been better if, after she said, “Tybalt’s dead,” she told me my mother or my father, or both, were gone. That would have made me make the normal cries of sadness. But to say that Tybalt’s dead and then say, “Romeo has been banished.” To say that is like saying that my father, my mother, Tybalt, Romeo, and Juliet have all been killed, they’re all dead. “Romeo has been banished.” That news brings infinite death. No words can express the pain. Where are my father and my mother, Nurse?"
Weeping and wailing over Tybalt’s corse.,They are crying and moaning over Tybalt’s corpse. Are you going to join them? I’ll bring you there.
"Wash they his wounds with tears? Mine shall be spent When theirs are dry, for Romeo’s banishment. Take up those cords.—Poor ropes, you are beguiled, Both you and I, for Romeo is exiled. But I, a maid, die maiden-widowèd. Come, cords.—Come, Nurse. I’ll to my wedding bed. And death, not Romeo, take my maidenhead!","Are they washing out his wounds with their tears? I’ll cry my tears for Romeo’s banishment when their tears are dry. Pick up this rope ladder. This poor rope ladder, it’s useless now, just like me, because Romeo has been exiled. He made this rope ladder to be a highway to my bed, but I am a virgin, and I will die a virgin and a widow. Let’s go, rope ladder. Nurse, I’m going to lie in my wedding bed. And death, not Romeo, can take my virginity!"
"Hie to your chamber. I’ll find Romeo Hark ye, your Romeo will be here at night. I’ll to him. He is hid at Lawrence' cell.","Go to your bedroom. I’ll find Romeo to comfort you. I know where he is. Listen, your Romeo will be here tonight. I’ll go to him. He’s hiding out in Friar Lawrence’s cell."
"(gives the NURSE a ring)O, find him! Give this ring to my true knight, And bid him come to take his last farewell.","(giving her a ring) Oh, find him! Give this ring to my true knight! And tell him to come here to say his last goodbye."
"Romeo, come forth. Come forth, thou fearful man. Affliction is enamoured of thy parts, And thou art wedded to calamity.","Romeo, come out. Come out, you frightened man. Trouble likes you, and you’re married to disaster."
"Father, what news? What is the Prince’s doom? That I yet know not?","Father, what’s the news? What punishment did the Prince announce? What suffering lies in store for me that I don’t know about yet?"
Too familiar Is my dear son with such sour company. I bring thee tidings of the Prince’s doom.,You know too much about suffering. I have news for you about the Prince’s punishment.
What less than doomsday is the Prince’s doom?,Is the Prince’s punishment any less awful than doomsday?
"Not body’s death, but body’s banishment.","He made a gentler decision. You won’t die, but you’ll be banished from the city."
"Ha, banishment! Be merciful, say “death,” For exile hath more terror in his look, Much more than death. Do not say “banishment.”","Ha, banishment? Be merciful and say “death.” Exile is much worse than death. Don’t say “banishment.”"
"Be patient, for the world is broad and wide.","From now on, you are banished from Verona. You should be able to endure this because the world is broad and wide."
"There is no world without Verona walls But purgatory, torture, hell itself. Hence “banishèd” is banished from the world,","There is no world for me outside the walls of Verona, except purgatory, torture, and hell itself. So to be banished from Verona is like being banished from the world, and being banished from the world is death."
"Is death mistermed. Calling death “banishment,” Thou cutt’st my head off with a golden ax And smilest upon the stroke that murders me.",Banishment is death by the wrong name. Calling death banishment is like cutting off my head with a golden ax and smiling while I’m being murdered.
"O deadly sin! O rude unthankfulness! Taking thy part, hath rushed aside the law, And turned that black word “death” to “banishment.” This is dear mercy, and thou seest it not.","Oh, deadly sin! Oh, rude and unthankful boy! You committed a crime that is punishable by death, but our kind Prince took sympathy on you and ignored the law when he substituted banishment for death. This is kind mercy, and you don’t realize it."
"'Tis torture and not mercy. Heaven is here, And little mouse, every unworthy thing, Live here in heaven and may look on her, But Romeo may not. More validity, More honorable state, more courtship lives On the white wonder of dear Juliet’s hand And steal immortal blessing from her lips, Who even in pure and vestal modesty, Still blush, as thinking their own kisses sin. Flies may do this, but I from this must fly. They are free men, but I am banishèd. And sayst thou yet that exile is not death? Hadst thou no poison mixed, no sharp-ground knife, But “banishèd” to kill me?—“Banishèd”! O Friar, the damnèd use that word in hell. Howling attends it. How hast thou the heart, Being a divine, a ghostly confessor, To mangle me with that word “banishèd”?","It’s torture, not mercy. Heaven is here because Juliet lives here. Every cat and dog and little mouse, every unworthy animal that lives here can see her, but Romeo can’t. Flies are healthier and more honorable and better suited for romance than Romeo. They can take hold of Juliet’s wonderful white hand and they can kiss her sweet lips. Even while she remains a pure virgin, she blushes when her lips touch each other because she thinks it’s a sin. But Romeo can’t kiss her or hold her hand because he’s been banished. Flies can kiss her, but I must flee the city. Flies are like free men, but I have been banished. And yet you say that exile is not death? Did you have no poison, no sharp knife, no weapon you could use to kill me quickly, nothing so disgraceful, except banishment? Oh Friar, damned souls use the word banishment to describe hell. They howl about banishment. If you’re a member of a divine spiritual order of men who forgive sins, and you say you’re my friend, how do you have the heart to mangle me with the word banishment?"
"Thou fond mad man, hear me a little speak.","You foolish madman, listen to me for a moment."
"Oh, thou wilt speak again of banishment.","Oh, you’re just going to talk about banishment again."
I’ll give thee armor to keep off that word— To comfort thee though thou art banishèd.,I’ll give you protection from that word. I’ll give you the antidote for trouble: philosophy. Philosophy will comfort you even though you’ve been banished.
"Yet “banishèd”? Hang up philosophy! Unless philosophy can make a Juliet, Displant a town, reverse a prince’s doom,","You’re still talking about “banished?” Forget about philosophy! Unless philosophy can create a Juliet, or pick up a town and put it somewhere else, or reverse a prince’s punishment, it doesn’t do me any good. Don’t say anything else."
"Oh, then I see that madmen have no ears.","Oh, so madmen like you are also deaf."
"How should they, when that wise men have no eyes?","How should madmen hear, if wise men can’t even see?"
Let me dispute with thee of thy estate.,Let me talk to you about your situation.
"Thou canst not speak of that thou dost not feel. An hour but married, Tybalt murderèd, Doting like me, and like me banishèd, Then mightst thou speak, then mightst thou tear thy hair And fall upon the ground, as I do now,","You can’t talk about something that you don’t feel. If you were as young as I am, if you were in love with Juliet, if you had just married her an hour ago, if then you murdered Tybalt, if you were lovesick like me, and if you were banished, then you might talk about it. You might also tear your hair out of your head and collapse to the ground the way I do right now. (ROMEO falls on the ground) You might kneel down and measure the grave that hasn’t yet been dug."
"Arise. One knocks. Good Romeo, hide thyself.","Get up. Somebody’s knocking. Hide yourself, good Romeo."
"Not I, unless the breath of heartsick groans, Mistlike, infold me from the search of eyes.",I won’t hide unless all the mist from my heartsick groans envelopes me like fog and conceals me from people’s searching eyes.
"Hark, how they knock!—Who’s there?—Romeo, arise.","Listen, they’re still knocking!—(to the person at the door) Who’s there?—(to ROMEO) Romeo, get up. They’ll arrest you.—(to the person at the door) Hold on a moment.—(to ROMEO) Get up."
"Run to my study.—By and by!—God’s will, What simpleness is this!—I come, I come.","Run and hide in my study.—Just a minute—For the love of God, why are you being so stupid? I’m coming. I’m coming."
Who knocks so hard? Whence come you? What’s your will?,Why are you knocking so hard? Where do you come from? What do you want?
"(from within) Let me come in, and you shall know my errand.","(from offstage) Let me come in, and I’ll tell you why I came. I come from Lady Juliet."
(opens the door) Welcome then.,"(opening the door) Welcome, then."
"O holy Friar, O, tell me, holy Friar, Where is my lady’s lord? Where’s Romeo?","Oh, holy Friar, Oh, tell me, holy Friar, where is my lady’s husband? Where’s Romeo?"
"There on the ground, with his own tears made drunk.",He’s there on the ground. He’s been getting drunk on his own tears.
"Oh, he is even in my mistress' case, Piteous predicament! Even so lies she, Blubbering and weeping, weeping and blubbering. Stand up, stand up. Stand, an you be a man. For Juliet’s sake, for her sake, rise and stand.","Oh, he’s acting just like Juliet, just like her. Oh painful sympathy! What a pitiful problem! She’s lying on the ground just like him, blubbering and weeping, weeping and blubbering. Stand up. Stand up. Stand up if you’re really a man. For Juliet’s sake, for her sake, rise and stand up. Why should you fall into so deep a moan?"
Nurse!,Nurse!
"Ah sir, ah sir. Death’s the end of all.","Ah sir, ah sir. Well, death is the end for everybody."
"Spakest thou of Juliet? How is it with her? Doth she not think me an old murderer, With blood removed but little from her own? Where is she? And how doth she? And what says My concealed lady to our canceled love?",Were you talking about Juliet? How is she? Does she think that I’m a practiced murderer because I tainted our newfound joy by killing one of her close relatives? Where is she? How is she doing? What does my hidden wife say about our ruined love?
"Oh, she says nothing, sir, but weeps and weeps, And “Tybalt” calls, and then on Romeo cries, And then down falls again.","Oh, she doesn’t say anything, sir. She just weeps and weeps. She falls on her bed and then starts to get up. Then she calls out Tybalt’s name and cries “Romeo,” and then she falls down again."
"As if that name, Shot from the deadly level of a gun, Did murder her, as that name’s cursed hand In what vile part of this anatomy Doth my name lodge? Tell me, that I may sack The hateful mansion. (draws his dagger)","She’s calling out my name as if I were a bullet murdering her, just like I murdered her relative. Tell me, Friar, in what part of my body is my name embedded? Tell me, so I can cut it out of myself. (he draws his dagger)"
"Hold thy desperate hand. Art thou a man? Thy form cries out thou art. The unreasonable fury of a beast. Unseemly woman in a seeming man, And ill-beseeming beast in seeming both! Thou hast amazed me. By my holy order, Hast thou slain Tybalt? Wilt thou slay thyself, And slay thy lady that in thy life lives By doing damnèd hate upon thyself? Why rail’st thou on thy birth, the heaven, and earth? In thee at once, which thou at once wouldst lose? Fie, fie, thou shamest thy shape, thy love, thy wit, Which, like a usurer, abound’st in all And usest none in that true use indeed Thy noble shape is but a form of wax, Digressing from the valor of a man; Thy dear love sworn but hollow perjury, Killing that love which thou hast vowed to cherish; Misshapen in the conduct of them both, Like powder in a skill-less soldier’s flask, Is set afire by thine own ignorance; And thou dismembered with thine own defence. For whose dear sake thou wast but lately dead— There art thou happy. Tybalt would kill thee, But thou slew’st Tybalt—there art thou happy. The law that threatened death becomes thy friend A pack of blessings light upon thy back, Happiness courts thee in her best array,","Hold on, and don’t act out of desperation. Are you a man? You look like a man, but your tears make you look like a woman. Your wild actions resemble the irrational fury of a beast. You’re a shameful woman who looks like a man or else an ugly creature who’s half-man, half-beast. You have amazed me. I swear by my holy order, I thought you were smarter and more rational than this. Have you killed Tybalt? Will you kill yourself? And would you also kill your wife, who shares your life, by committing the sin of killing yourself? Why do you complain about your birth, the heavens, and the earth? Life is the union of soul in body through the miracle of birth, but you would throw all that away. You bring shame to your body, your love, and your mind. You have so much natural talent, but like someone who hoards money, you use none of your talent for the right purpose—not your body, not your love, not your mind. Your body is just a wax figure, without the honor of a man. The love that you promised was a hollow lie. You’re killing the love that you vowed to cherish. Your mind, which aids both your body and your love, has mishandled both of them. You’re like a stupid soldier whose gunpowder explodes because he’s careless. The things you were supposed to use to defend yourself end up killing you. Get up, man! Your Juliet is alive. It was for her that you were almost killed earlier. Be happy that she’s alive. Tybalt wanted to kill you, but you killed Tybalt. Be happy that you’re alive. The law that threatened your life was softened into exile. Be happy about that. Your life is full of blessings. You have the best sorts of happiness to enjoy."
"But, like a misbehaved and sullen wench, Thou pout’st upon thy fortune and thy love. Go, get thee to thy love, as was decreed. Ascend her chamber, hence, and comfort her. But look thou stay not till the watch be set, For then thou canst not pass to Mantua, To blaze your marriage, reconcile your friends, Beg pardon of the Prince, and call thee back With twenty hundred thousand times more joy Than thou went’st forth in lamentation.— And bid her hasten all the house to bed, Which heavy sorrow makes them apt unto. Romeo is coming.","But like a misbehaved, sullen girl, you’re whining about your bad luck and your love. Listen, listen, people who act like that die miserable. Go be with your love, as it was decided at your wedding. Climb up to her bedroom and comfort her. But get out of there before the night watchmen take their positions. Then you will escape to the city of Mantua, where you’ll live until we can make your marriage public and make peace between your families. We’ll ask the Prince to pardon you. Then we’ll welcome you back with twenty thousand times more joy than you’ll have when you leave this town crying. Go ahead, Nurse. Give my regards to your lady, and tell her to hurry everybody in the house to bed. I’m sure they’re all so sad that they’ll be ready to sleep. Romeo is coming."
"O Lord, I could have stayed here all the night My lord, I’ll tell my lady you will come.","O Lord, I could stay here all night listening to such good advice. Educated men are so impressive! (speaking to ROMEO) My lord, I’ll tell my lady you will come."
"Do so, and bid my sweet prepare to chide.","Do so, and tell my sweet to be ready to scold me."
"Here, sir, a ring she bid me give you, sir. (gives ROMEO JULIET’s ring)","Here, sir, this is a ring she asked me to give you. Hurry up, it’s getting late. (she gives ROMEO JULIET’s ring)"
How well my comfort is revived by this!,This makes me feel so much better!
"Go hence. Good night. And here stands all your state: Either be gone before the watch be set, Or by the break of day disguised from hence. And he shall signify from time to time Every good hap to you that chances here. Give me thy hand. 'Tis late. Farewell, good night.","Now get out of here. Good night. Everything depends on this: either be out of here before the night watchmen take their positions, or leave in disguise after daybreak. Take a little vacation in Mantua. I’ll find your servant, and he’ll update you now and then on your case as it stands here. Give me your hand. It’s late. Farewell. Good night."
"But that a joy past joy calls out on me, Farewell.","I’m off to experience the greatest joy of all, but still it’s sad to leave you in such a rush. Farewell."
"Things have fall'n out, sir, so unluckily, That we have had no time to move our daughter. Look you, she loved her kinsman Tybalt dearly, And so did I. Well, we were born to die. I promise you, but for your company, I would have been abed an hour ago.","Things have turned out so unluckily, sir, that we haven’t had time to convince our daughter to marry you. Listen, she loved her cousin Tybalt dearly, and so did I. Well, we were all born to die. It’s very late, she won’t be coming downstairs tonight. Believe me, if you weren’t here visiting me, I myself would have gone to bed an hour ago."
"These times of woe afford no time to woo. Madam, good night. Commend me to your daughter.","These times of pain are bad times for romance. Madam, good night. Give my regards to your daughter."
Tonight she is mewed up to her heaviness.,"I will. And I’ll find out what she thinks about marriage early tomorrow. Tonight she is shut up in her room, alone with her sadness."
"Sir Paris, I will make a desperate tender Of my child’s love. I think she will be ruled In all respects by me. Nay, more, I doubt it not.— Acquaint her here of my son Paris' love, And bid her, mark you me, on Wednesday next— But, soft! What day is this?","Sir Paris, I’ll make a desperate argument for my child’s love. I think she’ll do whatever I say. No, I think she’ll do all that and more. I have no doubt about it. Wife, visit her in her room before you go to bed. Tell her about my son Paris’s love for her. And tell her, listen to me, on Wednesday—Wait—What day is today?"
"Monday, my lord.","Monday, my lord."
"O' Thursday let it be.—O' Thursday, tell her, She shall be married to this noble earl.— Will you be ready? Do you like this haste? We’ll keep no great ado, a friend or two. It may be thought we held him carelessly, Being our kinsman, if we revel much. Therefore we’ll have some half a dozen friends, And there an end. But what say you to Thursday?","Monday! Ha, ha! Well, Wednesday is too soon. Let it be on Thursday. On Thursday, tell her, she’ll be married to this noble earl. Will you be ready? Do you think it’s a good idea to rush? We shouldn’t have too big a celebration—we can invite a friend or two. Listen, because Tybalt was just killed, people might think that we don’t care about his memory as our relative if we have too grand a party. Therefore we’ll have about half a dozen friends to the wedding, and that’s it. What do you think about Thursday?"
"My lord, I would that Thursday were tomorrow.","My lord, I wish Thursday were tomorrow."
"Well get you gone. O' Thursday be it, then.— Go you to Juliet ere you go to bed. Prepare her, wife, against this wedding day.— Farewell, my lord.—Light to my chamber, ho! That we may call it early by and by.— Good night.","Well go on home. Thursday it is, then. (to LADY CAPULET) Visit Juliet before you go to bed. Get her ready, my wife, for this wedding day. (to PARIS) Farewell, my lord. Now I’m off to bed. Oh my! It’s so late that we might as well call it early. Good night."
"Wilt thou be gone? It is not yet near day. It was the nightingale, and not the lark, That pierced the fearful hollow of thine ear. Nightly she sings on yon pomegranate tree.","Are you going? It’s still a long time until daybreak. Don’t be afraid. That sound you heard was the nightingale The lark sings in the morning, the nightingale sings at night. nightingale , not the lark. Every night the nightingale chirps on that pomegranate-tree. Believe me, my love, it was the nightingale."
"It was the lark, the herald of the morn, No nightingale. Look, love, what envious streaks Do lace the severing clouds in yonder east. Night’s candles are burnt out, and jocund day I must be gone and live, or stay and die.","It was the lark, the bird that sings at dawn, not the nightingale. Look, my love, what are those streaks of light in the clouds parting in the east? Night is over, and day is coming. If I want to live, I must go. If I stay, I’ll die."
"Yon light is not daylight, I know it, I. It is some meteor that the sun exhales To be to thee this night a torchbearer, Therefore stay yet. Thou need’st not to be gone.","That light is not daylight, I know it. It’s some meteor coming out of the sun to light your way to Mantua. So stay for a while. You don’t have to go yet."
"Let me be ta'en. Let me be put to death. I am content, so thou wilt have it so. I’ll say yon grey is not the morning’s eye. Nor that is not the lark, whose notes do beat The vaulty heaven so high above our heads. I have more care to stay than will to go. Come, death, and welcome! Juliet wills it so.—","Let me be captured. Let me be put to death. I am content, if that’s the way you want it. I’ll say the light over there isn’t morning. I’ll say it’s the reflection of the moon. I’ll say that sound isn’t the lark ringing in the sky. I want to stay more than I want to go. Come, death, and welcome! Juliet wants it this way. How are you, my love? Let’s talk. It’s not daylight."
"It is, it is. Hie hence! Be gone, away! It is the lark that sings so out of tune, Straining harsh discords and unpleasing sharps. Some say the lark makes sweet division. Some say the lark and loathèd toad change eyes. Oh, now I would they had changed voices too, Since arm from arm that voice doth us affray, Hunting thee hence with hunt’s-up to the day.","It is, it is. Get out of here, be gone, go away! It’s the lark that sings so out of tune, making such harsh noise. Some say the lark makes a sweet division between day and night. It’s not true because she separates us. Some say the lark traded its eyes with the toad A folktale said that the lark had gotten its ugly eyes from the toad, who had taken its pretty eyes from the lark. Some say the lark traded its eyes with the toad . Oh, now I wish they had traded voices too! Because the lark’s voice tears us out of each other’s arms, and now there will be men hunting for you. Oh, go away now. I see more and more light."
"More light and light, more dark and dark our woes!",More and more light. More and more pain for us.
Madam.,Madam.
Nurse?,Nurse?
Your lady mother is coming to your chamber.,Your mother is coming to your bedroom. Day has broken. Be careful. Watch out.
"Then, window, let day in and let life out.","Then the window lets day in, and life goes out the window."
"Farewell, farewell. One kiss, and I’ll descend.","Farewell, farewell! Give me one kiss, and I’ll go down."
"Art thou gone so, love, lord? Ay, husband, friend, I must hear from thee every day in the hour, Oh, by this count I shall be much in years Ere I again behold my Romeo.","Are you gone like that, my love, my lord? Yes, my husband, my friend! I must hear from you every day in the hour. In a minute there are many days. Oh, by this count I’ll be many years older before I see my Romeo again."
"Farewell! I will omit no opportunity That may convey my greetings, love, to thee.",Farewell! I won’t miss any chance to send my love to you.
"Oh, think’st thou we shall ever meet again?","Oh, do you think we’ll ever meet again?"
"I doubt it not, and all these woes shall serve For sweet discourses in our time to come.",I have no doubts. All these troubles will give us stories to tell each other later in life.
"O God, I have an ill-divining soul. Methinks I see thee now, thou art so low Either my eyesight fails, or thou look’st pale.","Oh God, I have a soul that predicts evil things! Now that you are down there, you look like someone dead in the bottom of a tomb. Either my eyesight is failing me, or you look pale."
"And trust me, love, in my eye so do you. Dry sorrow drinks our blood. Adieu, adieu!","And trust me, love, you look pale to me too. Sadness takes away our color. Goodbye, Goodbye!"
"O fortune, fortune! All men call thee fickle. That is renowned for faith? Be fickle, fortune, For then, I hope, thou wilt not keep him long, But send him back.","Oh luck, luck. Everyone says you can’t make up your mind. If you change your mind so much, what are you going to do to Romeo, who’s so faithful? Change your mind, luck. I hope maybe then you’ll send him back home soon."
"(from within) Ho, daughter, are you up?","(offstage) Hey, daughter! Are you awake?"
Is she not down so late or up so early? What unaccustomed cause procures her hither?,Who’s that calling? Is it my mother? Isn’t she up very late? Or is she up very early? What strange reason could she have for coming here?
"Why, how now, Juliet?","What’s going on, Juliet?"
"Madam, I am not well.","Madam, I am not well."
"Evermore weeping for your cousin’s death? An if thou couldst, thou couldst not make him live. Therefore, have done. Some grief shows much of love, But much of grief shows still some want of wit.","Will you cry about your cousin’s death forever? Are you trying to wash him out of his grave with tears? If you could, you couldn’t bring him back to life. So stop crying. A little bit of grief shows a lot of love. But too much grief makes you look stupid."
Yet let me weep for such a feeling loss.,Let me keep weeping for such a great loss.
Which you weep for.,"You will feel the loss, but the man you weep for will feel nothing."
"Feeling so the loss, Cannot choose but ever weep the friend.","Feeling the loss like this, I can’t help but weep for him forever."
"Well, girl, thou weep’st not so much for his death, As that the villain lives which slaughtered him.","Well, girl, you’re weeping not for his death as much as for the fact that the villain who killed him is still alive."
"What villain, madam?","What villain, madam?"
"That same villain, Romeo.","That villain, Romeo."
"(aside) Villain and he be many miles asunder. (to LADY CAPULET) God pardon him! I do, with all my heart, And yet no man like he doth grieve my heart.","(speaking so that LADY CAPULET can’t hear) He’s far from being a villain. (to LADY CAPULET) May God pardon him! I do, with all my heart. And yet no man could make my heart grieve like he does."
That is because the traitor murderer lives.,That’s because the murderer is alive.
Would none but I might venge my cousin’s death!,"Yes, madam, he lies beyond my reach. I wish that no one could avenge my cousin’s death except me!"
"We will have vengeance for it, fear thou not. Then weep no more. I’ll send to one in Mantua, Where that same banished runagate doth live, That he shall soon keep Tybalt company. And then, I hope, thou wilt be satisfied.","We’ll have revenge for it. Don’t worry about that. Stop crying. I’ll send a man to Mantua, where that exiled rogue is living. Our man will poison Romeo’s drink, and Romeo will join Tybalt in death. And then, I hope, you’ll be satisfied."
"Indeed, I never shall be satisfied With Romeo, till I behold him—dead— Madam, if you could find out but a man To bear a poison, I would temper it, That Romeo should, upon receipt thereof, Soon sleep in quiet. Oh, how my heart abhors To wreak the love I bore my cousin Upon his body that slaughtered him!","I’ll never be satisfied with Romeo until I see him . . . dead—dead is how my poor heart feels when I think about my poor cousin. Madam, if you can find a man to deliver the poison, I’ll mix it myself so that Romeo will sleep quietly soon after he drinks it. Oh, how I hate to hear people say his name and not be able to go after him. I want to take the love I had for my cousin and take it out on the body of the man who killed him."
"Find thou the means, and I’ll find such a man. But now I’ll tell thee joyful tidings, girl.","Find out the way, and I’ll find the right man. But now I have joyful news for you, girl."
"What are they, beseech your ladyship?",And it’s good to have joy in such a joyless time. What’s the news? Please tell me.
"Well, well, thou hast a careful father, child. One who, to put thee from thy heaviness, Hath sorted out a sudden day of joy","Well, well, you have a careful father, child. He has arranged a sudden day of joy to end your sadness. A day that you did not expect and that I did not seek out."
"Madam, in happy time, what day is that?","Madam, tell me quickly, what day is that?"
"Marry, my child, early next Thursday morn, The gallant, young, and noble gentleman, The County Paris, at Saint Peter’s Church,","Indeed, my child, at Saint Peter’s Church early Thursday morning, the gallant, young, and noble gentleman Count Paris will happily make you a joyful bride."
"Now, by Saint Peter’s Church and Peter too, He shall not make me there a joyful bride. I wonder at this haste, that I must wed Ere he, that should be husband, comes to woo. I will not marry yet. And when I do, I swear It shall be Romeo, whom you know I hate, Rather than Paris. These are news indeed!","Now, I swear by Saint Peter’s Church and Peter too, he will not make me a joyful bride there. This is a strange rush. How can I marry him, this husband, before he comes to court me? Please, tell my father, madam, I won’t marry yet. And, when I do marry, I swear, it will be Romeo, whom you know I hate, rather than Paris. That’s really news!"
"Here comes your father. Tell him so yourself,","Here comes your father. Tell him so yourself, and see how he takes the news."
"When the sun sets the air doth drizzle dew, But for the sunset of my brother’s son It rains downright. How now? A conduit, girl? What, still in tears, Thou counterfeit’st a bark, a sea, a wind, For still thy eyes, which I may call the sea, Do ebb and flow with tears. The bark thy body is, Sailing in this salt flood. The winds thy sighs, Without a sudden calm will overset Thy tempest-tossèd body.—How now, wife? Have you delivered to her our decree?","When the sun sets, the air drizzles dew. But at the death of my brother’s son, it rains a downpour. What are you, girl? Some kind of fountain? Why are you still crying? Will you cry forever? In one little body you seem like a ship, the sea, and the winds. Your eyes, which I call the sea, flow with tears. The ship is your body which is sailing on the salt flood of your tears. The winds are your sighs. Your sighs and your tears are raging. Unless you calm down, tears and sighs will overwhelm your body and sink your ship. So where do things stand, wife? Have you told her our decision?"
"Ay, sir, but she will none, she gives you thanks.","Yes, sir, I told her. But she won’t agree. She says thank you but refuses. I wish the fool were dead and married to her grave!"
"Soft, take me with you, take me with you, wife. How, will she none? Doth she not give us thanks? Is she not proud? Doth she not count her blessed, Unworthy as she is, that we have wrought","Wait! Hold on, wife. I don’t understand. How can this be? She refuses? Isn’t she grateful? Isn’t she proud of such a match? Doesn’t she realize what a blessing this is? Doesn’t she realize how unworthy she is of the gentleman we have found to be her bridegroom?"
"Not proud you have, but thankful that you have. Proud can I never be of what I hate, But thankful even for hate that is meant love.","I am not proud of what you have found for me. But I am thankful that you have found it. I can never be proud of what I hate. But I can be thankful for something I hate, if it was meant with love."
"How, how, how, how? Chopped logic! What is this? And yet “not proud”? Mistress minion you, Thank me no thankings, nor proud me no prouds, But fettle your fine joints 'gainst Thursday next To go with Paris to Saint Peter’s Church, Out, you green sickness, carrion! Out, you baggage! You tallow face!","What is this? What is this fuzzy logic? What is this? I hear you say “proud” and “I thank you,” and then “no thank you” and “not proud,” you spoiled little girl. You’re not really giving me any thanks or showing me any pride. But get yourself ready for Thursday. You’re going to Saint Peter’s Church to marry Paris. And if you don’t go on your own, I’ll drag you there. You disgust me, you little bug! You worthless girl! You pale face!"
"Fie, fie! What, are you mad?","Shame on you! What, are you crazy?"
"Good Father, I beseech you on my knees, Hear me with patience but to speak a word.","Good father, I’m begging you on my knees, be patient and listen to me say just one thing."
"I tell thee what: get thee to church o' Thursday, Or never after look me in the face. Speak not. Reply not. Do not answer me. My fingers itch.—Wife, we scarce thought us blest But now I see this one is one too much And that we have a curse in having her. Out on her, hilding!","Forget about you, you worthless girl! You disobedient wretch! I’ll tell you what. Go to church on Thursday or never look me in the face again. Don’t say anything. Don’t reply. Don’t talk back to me. (JULIET rises) I feel like slapping you. Wife, we never thought ourselves blessed that God only gave us this one child. But now I see that this one is one too many. We were cursed when we had her. She disgusts me, the little hussy!"
"God in heaven bless her! You are to blame, my lord, to rate her so.","God in heaven bless her! My lord, you’re wrong to berate her like that."
"Good prudence. Smatter with your gossips, go.","And why, wise lady? You shut up, old woman. Go blabber with your gossiping friends."
I speak no treason.,I’ve said nothing wrong.
"Oh, God 'i' good e'en.","Oh, for God’s sake."
May not one speak?,Can’t I say something?
"Peace, you mumbling fool! Utter your gravity o'er a gossip’s bowl,","Be quiet, you mumbling fool! Say your serious things at lunch with your gossiping friends. We don’t need to hear it."
You are too hot.,You’re getting too angry.
"God’s bread! It makes me mad. Day, night, hour, tide, time, work, play, Alone, in company, still my care hath been To have her matched. And having now provided Of fair demesnes, youthful, and nobly trained, Stuffed, as they say, with honorable parts, Proportioned as one’s thought would wish a man— And then to have a wretched puling fool, To answer “I’ll not wed,” “I cannot love,” “I am too young,” “I pray you, pardon me.”— But, an you will not wed, I’ll pardon you. Graze where you will, you shall not house with me. Thursday is near. Lay hand on heart, advise. An you be mine, I’ll give you to my friend. An you be not, hang, beg, starve, die in the streets, For, by my soul, I’ll ne'er acknowledge thee, Trust to ’t, bethink you. I’ll not be forsworn.","Goddammit! It makes me mad. Day and night, hour after hour, all the time, at work, at play, alone, in company, my top priority has always been to find her a husband. Now I’ve provided a husband from a noble family, who is good-looking, young, well-educated. He’s full of good qualities. He’s the man of any girl’s dreams. But this wretched, whimpering fool, like a whining puppet, she looks at this good fortune and answers, “I won’t get married. I can’t fall in love. I’m too young. Please, excuse me.” Well, if you won’t get married, I’ll excuse you. Eat wherever you want, but you can no longer live under my roof. Consider that. Think about it. I’m not in the habit of joking. Thursday is coming. Put your hand on your heart and listen to my advice. If you act like my daughter, I’ll marry you to my friend. If you don’t act like my daughter, you can beg, starve, and die in the streets. I swear on my soul, I will never take you back or do anything for you. Believe me. Think about it. I won’t break this promise."
"Is there no pity sitting in the clouds That sees into the bottom of my grief?— O sweet my mother, cast me not away! Or, if you do not, make the bridal bed In that dim monument where Tybalt lies.","Is there no pity in the sky that can see my sadness? Oh, my sweet mother, don’t throw me out! Delay this marriage for a month, or a week. Or, if you don’t delay, make my wedding bed in the tomb where Tybalt lies."
"Talk not to me, for I’ll not speak a word. Do as thou wilt, for I have done with thee.","Don’t talk to me, because I won’t say a word. Do as you please, because I’m done worrying about you."
"My husband is on earth, my faith in heaven. How shall that faith return again to earth, Unless that husband send it me from heaven By leaving earth? Comfort me. Counsel me.— Upon so soft a subject as myself.— What sayst thou? Hast thou not a word of joy? Some comfort, Nurse.","Oh God!—Oh Nurse, how can this be stopped? My husband is alive on earth, my vows of marriage are in heaven. How can I bring those promises back down to earth, unless my husband sends them back down to me by dying and going to heaven? Give me comfort. Give me advice. Oh no! Oh no! Why does heaven play tricks on someone as weak as me? What do you say? Don’t you have one word of joy? Give me some comfort, Nurse."
"Faith, here it is. Romeo is banishèd, and all the world to nothing Or, if he do, it needs must be by stealth. Then, since the case so stands as now it doth, I think it best you married with the county. Oh, he’s a lovely gentleman. Hath not so green, so quick, so fair an eye As Paris hath. Beshrew my very heart, I think you are happy in this second match, For it excels your first. Or if it did not, As living here and you no use of him.","This is what I have to say: Romeo has been banished. And it’s a sure thing that he will never come back to challenge you. If he does come back, he’ll have to sneak back undercover. Then, since things are the way they are, I think the best thing to do is to marry the count. Oh, he’s a lovely gentleman! Romeo’s a dishcloth compared to him. Madam, an eagle does not have eyes as green, as quick, and as fair as the eyes of Paris. Curse my very heart, but I think you should be happy in this second marriage, because it’s better than your first. Even if it’s not better, your first marriage is over. Or if Romeo is as good as Paris, Romeo doesn’t live here, so you don’t get to enjoy him."
Speakest thou from thy heart?,Are you speaking from your heart?
"And from my soul too, else beshrew them both.","I speak from my heart and from my soul too. If not, curse them both."
Amen!,Amen!
What?,What?
"Well, thou hast comforted me marvelous much. Go in, and tell my lady I am gone, Having displeased my father, to Lawrence’s cell To make confession and to be absolved.","Well, you have given me great comfort. Go inside and tell my mother that I’m gone. I made my father angry, so I went to Friar Lawrence’s cell to confess and be forgiven."
"Marry, I will, and this is wisely done.","Alright, I will. This is a good idea."
"Ancient damnation! O most wicked fiend! Is it more sin to wish me thus forsworn, Or to dispraise my lord with that same tongue Which she hath praised him with above compare Thou and my bosom henceforth shall be twain. I’ll to the friar to know his remedy. If all else fail, myself have power to die.","That damned old lady! Oh, that most wicked fiend! Is it a worse sin for her to want me to break my vows or for her to say bad things about my husband after she praised him so many times before? Away with you and your advice, Nurse. From now on, I will never tell you what I feel in my heart. I’m going to the Friar to find out his solution. If everything else fails, at least I have the power to take my own life."
"On Thursday, sir? The time is very short.","On Thursday, sir? That’s very soon."
"My father Capulet will have it so, And I am nothing slow to slack his haste.","That’s how my future father-in-law Capulet wants it, and I’m not dragging my feet."
You say you do not know the lady’s mind.,You say you don’t know what the girl thinks. That’s a rocky road to be riding. I don’t like it.
"Immoderately she weeps for Tybalt’s death, And therefore have I little talked of love, For Venus smiles not in a house of tears. Now, sir, her father counts it dangerous And in his wisdom hastes our marriage To stop the inundation of her tears— Which, too much minded by herself alone, May be put from her by society.","She’s grieving too much over the death of Tybalt. So I haven’t had the chance to talk to her about love. Romantic love doesn’t happen when people are in mourning. Now, sir, her father thinks it’s dangerous that she allows herself to become so sad. He’s being smart by rushing our marriage to stop her from crying. She cries too much by herself. If she had someone to be with her, she would stop crying. Now you know the reason for the rush."
"(aside) I would I knew not why it should be slowed.— Look, sir, here comes the lady toward my cell.","(to himself) I wish I didn’t know the reason why the marriage should be slowed down. Look, sir, here comes the lady walking toward my cell."
"Happily met, my lady and my wife.","I’m happy to meet you, my lady and my wife."
"That may be, sir, when I may be a wife.","That might be the case sir, after I’m married."
"That “may be” must be, love, on Thursday next.","That “may be” must be, love, on Thursday."
What must be shall be.,What must be will be.
That’s a certain text.,That is a certain truth.
Come you to make confession to this Father?,Have you come to make confession to this father?
"To answer that, I should confess to you.","If I answered that question, I’d be making confession to you."
Do not deny to him that you love me.,Don’t deny to him that you love me.
I will confess to you that I love him.,I’ll confess to you that I love him.
"So will ye, I am sure, that you love me.","You will also confess, I’m sure, that you love me."
"If I do so, it will be of more price Being spoke behind your back than to your face.","If I do so, it will mean more if I say it behind your back than if I say it to your face."
"Poor soul, thy face is much abused with tears.","You poor soul, your face has suffered many tears."
"The tears have got small victory by that, For it was bad enough before their spite.",The tears haven’t done much because my face looked bad enough before I started to cry.
Thou wrong’st it more than tears with that report.,You’re treating your face even worse by saying that.
"That is no slander, sir, which is a truth,","What I say isn’t slander, sir. It’s the truth. And what I said, I said to my face."
"Thy face is mine, and thou hast slandered it.","Your face is mine, and you have slandered it."
"It may be so, for it is not mine own.— Are you at leisure, holy Father, now, Or shall I come to you at evening mass?","That may be the case, because my face doesn’t belong to me.—Do you have time for me now, Father, or should I come to you at evening mass?"
"My lord, we must entreat the time alone.","I have time for you now, my sad daughter. (to PARIS) My lord, we must ask you to leave us alone."
"God shield I should disturb devotion!— Juliet, on Thursday early will I rouse ye. (kisses her) Till then, adieu, and keep this holy kiss.","God forbid that I should prevent sacred devotion! Juliet, I will wake you early on Thursday. (kissing her) Until then, good-bye, and keep this holy kiss."
"Come weep with me, past hope, past cure, past help.","Oh, shut the door, and after you shut it, come over here and weep with me. This mess is beyond hope, beyond cure, beyond help!"
"O Juliet, I already know thy grief. It strains me past the compass of my wits. I hear thou must, and nothing may prorogue it,","Oh, Juliet, I already know about your sad situation. It’s a problem too hard for me to solve. I hear that you must marry this count on Thursday, and that nothing can delay it."
"Tell me not, Friar, that thou hear’st of this, Unless thou tell me how I may prevent it. If in thy wisdom thou canst give no help, Do thou but call my resolution wise, (shows him a knife) God joined my heart and Romeo’s, thou our hands. And ere this hand, by thee to Romeo sealed, Shall be the label to another deed, Turn to another, this shall slay them both. Therefore out of thy long-experienced time, Give me some present counsel, or, behold, 'Twixt my extremes and me this bloody knife Which the commission of thy years and art Could to no issue of true honor bring. Be not so long to speak. I long to die If what thou speak’st speak not of remedy.","Don’t tell me that you’ve heard about this marriage, Friar, unless you can tell me how to prevent it. If you who are so wise can’t help, please be kind enough to call my solution wise. (she shows him a knife) And I’ll solve the problem now with this knife. God joined my heart to Romeo’s. You joined our hands. And before I—who was married to Romeo by you—am married to another man, I’ll kill myself. You are wise and you have so much experience. Give me some advice about the current situation. Or watch. Caught between these two difficulties, I’ll act like a judge with my bloody knife. I will truly and honorably resolve the situation that you can’t fix, despite your experience and education. Don’t wait long to speak. I want to die if what you say isn’t another solution."
"Which craves as desperate an execution As that is desperate which we would prevent. If, rather than to marry County Paris, Thou hast the strength of will to slay thyself, A thing like death to chide away this shame, That copest with death himself to ’scape from it. An if thou darest, I’ll give thee remedy.","Hold on, daughter, I see some hope. But we must act boldly because the situation is so desperate. If you’ve made up your mind to kill yourself instead of marrying Count Paris, then you’ll probably be willing to try something like death to solve this shameful problem. You can wrestle with death to escape from shame. And if you dare to do it, I’ll give you the solution."
"O, bid me leap, rather than marry Paris, Or walk in thievish ways; or bid me lurk Where serpents are; chain me with roaring bears; Or shut me nightly in a charnel house, O'ercovered quite with dead men’s rattling bones, Or bid me go into a new-made grave And hide me with a dead man in his shroud— Things that, to hear them told, have made me tremble— And I will do it without fear or doubt,","Oh, you can tell me to jump off the battle posts of any tower, or to walk down the crime-ridden streets of a slum. Or tell me to sit in a field full of poisonous snakes. Chain me up with wild bears. Hide me every night in a morgue full of dead bodies with wet, smelly flesh and skulls without jawbones. Or tell me to climb down into a freshly dug grave, and hide me with a dead man in his tomb. All those ideas make me tremble when I hear them named. But I will do them without fear or dread in order to be a pure wife to my sweet love."
"Hold, then. Go home, be merry. Give consent To marry Paris. Wednesday is tomorrow. Tomorrow night look that thou lie alone. Let not the Nurse lie with thee in thy chamber. Take thou this vial, being then in bed, And this distillèd liquor drink thou off, When presently through all thy veins shall run A cold and drowsy humor, for no pulse No warmth, no breath shall testify thou livest. The roses in thy lips and cheeks shall fade To paly ashes, thy eyes' windows fall Like death when he shuts up the day of life. Shall, stiff and stark and cold, appear like death. And in this borrowed likeness of shrunk death Thou shalt continue two and forty hours, And then awake as from a pleasant sleep. To rouse thee from thy bed, there art thou dead. Then, as the manner of our country is, In thy best robes uncovered on the bier Thou shalt be borne to that same ancient vault In the meantime, against thou shalt awake, Shall Romeo by my letters know our drift, And hither shall he come, and he and I Will watch thy waking, and that very night And this shall free thee from this present shame, If no inconstant toy, nor womanish fear, Abate thy valor in the acting it.","Hold on, then. Go home, be cheerful, and tell them you agree to marry Paris. Tomorrow is Wednesday. Tomorrow night make sure that you are alone. Don’t let the Nurse stay with you in your bedroom. (showing her a vial) When you’re in bed, take this vial, mix its contents with liquor, and drink. Then a cold, sleep-inducing drug will run through your veins, and your pulse will stop. Your flesh will be cold, and you’ll stop breathing. The red in your lips and your cheeks will turn pale, and your eyes will shut. It will seem like you’re dead. You won’t be able to move, and your body will be stiff like a corpse. You’ll remain in this deathlike state for forty-two hours, and then you’ll wake up as if from a pleasant sleep. Now, when the bridegroom comes to get you out of bed on Thursday morning, you’ll seem dead. Then, as tradition demands, you’ll be dressed up in your best clothes, put in an open coffin, and carried to the Capulet family tomb. Meanwhile, I’ll send Romeo word of our plan. He’ll come here, and we’ll keep a watch for when you wake up. That night, Romeo will take you away to Mantua. This plan will free you from the shameful situation that troubles you now as long as you don’t change your mind, or become scared like a silly woman and ruin your brave effort."
"Give me, give me! O, tell not me of fear!",Give me the vial. Give it to me! Don’t talk to me about fear.
Hold. Get you gone. Be strong and prosperous In this resolve. I’ll send a friar with speed To Mantua with my letters to thy lord.,(giving her the vial) Now go along on your way. Be strong and successful in this decision. I’ll send a friar quickly to Mantua with my letter for Romeo.
"Love give me strength, and strength shall help afford.","Love will give me strength, and strength will help me accomplish this plan. Goodbye, dear Father."
(gives paper to FIRST SERVINGMAN) So many guests invite as here are writ.,(giving the FIRST SERVINGMAN a piece of paper) Invite all the guests on this list.
"(to SECOND SERVINGMAN) Sirrah, go hire me twenty cunning cooks.","(to SECOND SERVINGMAN) Boy, go hire twenty skilled cooks."
"You shall have none ill, sir, for I’ll try if they can lick their fingers.",You won’t get any bad cooks from me. I’ll test them by making them lick their fingers.
How canst thou try them so?,How can you test them like that?
"Marry, sir, ’tis an ill cook that cannot lick his own fingers. Therefore he that cannot lick his fingers goes not with me.","Easy, sir. It’s a bad cook who can’t lick his own fingers. So the cooks who can’t lick their fingers aren’t hired."
"Go, be gone. We shall be much unfurnished for this time.","Go, get out of here."
"What, is my daughter gone to Friar Lawrence?","We’re unprepared for this wedding celebration. (to the NURSE) What, has my daughter gone to see Friar Lawrence?"
"Ay, forsooth.","Yes, that’s true."
A peevish self-willed harlotry it is.,"Well, there’s a chance he may do her some good. She’s a stubborn little brat."
See where she comes from shrift with merry look.,"Look, she’s come home from confession with a happy look on her face."
"How now, my headstrong? Where have you been gadding?","So, my headstrong daughter, where have you been?"
"Where I have learned me to repent the sin To you and your behests, and am enjoined By holy Lawrence to fall prostrate here To beg your pardon. (falls to her knees) Pardon, I beseech you!","I went somewhere where I learned that being disobedient to my father is a sin. Holy Father Lawrence instructed me to fall on my knees and beg your forgiveness. (she kneels down) Forgive me, I beg you. From now on I’ll do whatever you say."
Send for the county. Go tell him of this. I’ll have this knot knit up tomorrow morning.,Send for the Count. Go tell him about this. I’ll make this wedding happen tomorrow morning.
"I met the youthful lord at Lawrence' cell, And gave him what becomèd love I might,","I met the young man at Lawrence’s cell. I treated him with the proper love, as well as I could, while still being modest."
"Why, I am glad on ’t. This is well. Stand up.","Well, I’m glad about this. This is good. Stand up."
"This is as ’t should be.—Let me see the county. Ay, marry, go, I say, and fetch him hither.— Now, afore God, this reverend holy friar!","This is the way it should be. I want to see the count. Yes, alright, go, I say, and bring him here. Now, before God, our whole city owes this friar a great debt."
"Nurse, will you go with me into my closet To help me sort such needful ornaments As you think fit to furnish me tomorrow?","Nurse, will you come with me to my closet and help me pick out the clothes and the jewelry I’ll need to wear tomorrow?"
"No, not till Thursday. There is time enough.","No, not until Thursday. There’s plenty of time."
"Go, Nurse. Go with her. We’ll to church tomorrow.","Go, Nurse, go with her. We’ll have the wedding at the church tomorrow."
We shall be short in our provision. 'Tis now near night.,Our supplies will be short for the party. It’s already almost night.
"Tush, I will stir about, And all things shall be well, I warrant thee, wife. Go thou to Juliet, help to deck up her. I’ll play the housewife for this once.","Don’t worry, I will set things in motion. And everything will be alright, I promise you, wife. You should go to Juliet and dress her up. I’m not going to bed tonight. Leave me alone. I’ll pretend to be the housewife for once."
"—What, ho? They are all forth?—Well, I will walk myself To County Paris, to prepare him up Against tomorrow. My heart is wondrous light","Hey! What? They’re all gone? Well, I will walk by myself to Count Paris to get him ready for tomorrow. My heart is wonderfully happy because this troubled girl has been taken back and now will be married."
"Ay, those attires are best. But, gentle Nurse, I pray thee, leave me to myself tonight, For I have need of many orisons To move the heavens to smile upon my state,","Yes, those are the best clothes. But, gentle Nurse, please leave me alone tonight. I have to say a lot of prayers to make the heavens bless me. You know that my life is troubled and full of sin."
"What, are you busy, ho? Need you my help?","What, are you busy? Do you need my help?"
"No, madam. We have culled such necessaries As are behooveful for our state tomorrow. So please you, let me now be left alone, For, I am sure, you have your hands full all In this so sudden business.","No, madam, we’ve figured out the best things for me to wear tomorrow at the ceremony. So if it’s okay with you, I’d like to be left alone now. Let the Nurse sit up with you tonight. I’m sure you have your hands full preparing for the sudden festivities."
"Good night. Get thee to bed and rest, for thou hast need.",Good night. Go to bed and get some rest. I’m sure you need it.
Farewell!—God knows when we shall meet again. That almost freezes up the heat of life. I’ll call them back again to comfort me.— Nurse!—What should she do here?,"Good-bye. Only God knows when we’ll meet again. There is a slight cold fear cutting through my veins. It almost freezes the heat of life. I’ll call them back here to comfort me. Nurse!—Oh, what good would she do here? In my desperate situation, I have to act alone."
"My dismal scene I needs must act alone. What if this mixture do not work at all? Shall I be married then tomorrow morning? No, no. This shall forbid it. Lie thou there. (lays her knife down) Subtly hath ministered to have me dead, Lest in this marriage he should be dishonored Because he married me before to Romeo? I fear it is. And yet, methinks, it should not, How if, when I am laid into the tomb, I wake before the time that Romeo Come to redeem me? There’s a fearful point. Shall I not, then, be stifled in the vault And there die strangled ere my Romeo comes? Or, if I live, is it not very like The horrible conceit of death and night, Together with the terror of the place— Where for these many hundred years the bones Of all my buried ancestors are packed; Where bloody Tybalt, yet but green in earth, Lies festering in his shroud; where, as they say, Alack, alack, is it not like that I, So early waking, what with loathsome smells, And shrieks like mandrakes torn out of the earth, That living mortals, hearing them, run mad—?","Alright, here’s the vial. What if this mixture doesn’t work at all? Will I be married tomorrow morning? No, no, this knife will stop it. Lie down right there. (she lays down the knife) What if the Friar mixed the potion to kill me? Is he worried that he will be disgraced if I marry Paris after he married me to Romeo? I’m afraid that it’s poison. And yet, it shouldn’t be poison because he is a trustworthy holy man. What if, when I am put in the tomb, I wake up before Romeo comes to save me? That’s a frightening idea. Won’t I suffocate in the tomb? There’s no healthy air to breathe in there. Will I die of suffocation before Romeo comes? Or if I live, I’ll be surrounded by death and darkness. It will be terrible. There will be bones hundreds of years old in that tomb, my ancestors' bones. Tybalt’s body will be in there, freshly entombed, and his corpse will be rotting. They say that during the night the spirits are in tombs. Oh no, oh no. I’ll wake up and smell awful odors. I’ll hear screams that would drive people crazy."
"Environèd with all these hideous fears, And madly play with my forefather’s joints, And pluck the mangled Tybalt from his shroud, And, in this rage, with some great kinsman’s bone, Oh, look! Methinks I see my cousin’s ghost Seeking out Romeo, that did spit his body Upon a rapier’s point. Stay, Tybalt, stay! Romeo, Romeo, Romeo! Here’s drink. I drink to thee.","If I wake up too early, won’t I go insane with all these horrible, frightening things around me, start playing with my ancestors' bones, and pull Tybalt’s corpse out of his death shroud? Will I grab one of my dead ancestor’s bones and bash in my own skull? Oh, look! I think I see my cousin Tybalt’s ghost. He’s looking for Romeo because Romeo killed him with his sword. Wait, Tybalt, wait! Romeo, Romeo, Romeo! Here’s a drink. I drink to you."
"Hold, take these keys, and fetch more spices, Nurse.","Wait. Take these keys and get more spices, Nurse."
They call for dates and quinces in the pastry.,They’re calling for dates and quinces in the pastry kitchen.
"Come, stir, stir, stir! The second cock hath crowed. The curfew bell hath rung. 'Tis three o'clock.— Spare not for the cost.","Come on, wake up, wake up, wake up! The second cock crowed. The curfew-bell rang. It’s three o'clock. Go get the baked meats, good Angelica. Don’t worry about the cost."
"Go, you cot-quean, go. Get you to bed, faith. You’ll be sick tomorrow For this night’s watching.","Go, you old housewife, go. Go to bed, dear. You’ll be sick tomorrow because you’ve stayed up all night."
"No, not a whit, what. I have watched ere now","No, not at all. What? I’ve stayed up all night many times before for less important matters, and I’ve never gotten sick."
"Ay, you have been a mouse-hunt in your time, But I will watch you from such watching now.","Yes, you’ve been a ladies' man in your time. But I’ll make sure you don’t stay up any later now."
"A jealous hood, a jealous hood!","A jealous woman, a jealous woman!"
"Now, fellow, What is there?","Now, fellow, what have you got there?"
"Things for the cook, sir, but I know not what.","Things for the cook, sir. But I don’t know what they are."
"Make haste, make haste, sirrah.","Hurry up, hurry up."
(to SECOND SERVINGMAN) Fetch drier logs. Call Peter. He will show thee where they are.,"(to SECOND SERVINGMAN) You, fetch logs that are drier than these. Call Peter, he’ll show you where they are."
"I have a head, sir, that will find out logs,",I’m smart enough to find the logs myself without bothering Peter.
"Mass, and well said. A merry whoreson, ha! Thou shalt be loggerhead.—Good faith, ’tis day. The county will be here with music straight, For so he said he would. I hear him near.—","Right, and well said. That guy’s funny. He’s got a head full of logs. Goodness, it’s daylight. The count will be here soon with music. At least he said he would. I hear him coming near."
"Nurse! Wife! What, ho? What, Nurse, I say!","Nurse! Wife! What? Hey, Nurse!"
"Go waken Juliet. Go and trim her up. I’ll go and chat with Paris. Hie, make haste, Make haste. The bridegroom he is come already. Make haste, I say.","Go wake Juliet. Go and get her dressed. I’ll go and chat with Paris. Hey, hurry up, hurry up! The bridegroom is already here. Hurry up, I say."
"Mistress! What, mistress! Juliet!—Fast, I warrant her, she.— Why, lamb! Why, lady! Fie, you slug-a-bed. Why, love, I say. Madam! Sweet-heart! Why, bride! What, not a word? You take your pennyworths now. The County Paris hath set up his rest That you shall rest but little.—God forgive me, Marry, and amen. How sound is she asleep! I must needs wake her.—Madam, madam, madam! He’ll fright you up, i' faith. Will it not be? (opens the bed curtains) What, dressed and in your clothes, and down again? I must needs wake you. Lady, lady, lady!— Oh, welladay, that ever I was born!— Some aqua vitae, ho!—My lord! My lady!","Mistress! Hey, mistress! Juliet! I bet she’s fast asleep. Hey, lamb! Hey, lady! Hey, you lazy bones! Hey, love, I say! Madam! Sweetheart! Hey, bride! What, you don’t say a word? You take your beauty sleep now. Get yourself a week’s worth of sleep. Tomorrow night, I bet, Count Paris won’t let you get much rest. God forgive me. Alright, and amen. How sound asleep she is! I must wake her up. Madam, madam, madam! Yes, let the count take you in your bed. He’ll wake you up, I bet. Won’t he? (she opens the bed curtains) What? You’re still dressed in all your clothes. But you’re still asleep. I must wake you up. Lady! Lady! Lady! Oh no, oh no! Help, help! My lady’s dead! Oh curse the day that I was born! Ho! Get me some brandy! My lord! My lady!"
What noise is here?,What’s all the noise in here?
O lamentable day!,"Oh, sad day!"
What is the matter?,What is the matter?
"Look, look. O heavy day!","Look, look! Oh, what a sad day!"
"Revive, look up, or I will die with thee!— Help, help! Call help.","Oh my, Oh my! My child, my reason for living, wake up, look up, or I’ll die with you! Help, help! Call for help."
"For shame, bring Juliet forth. Her lord is come.","For shame, bring Juliet out here. Her bridegroom is here."
"She’s dead, deceased, she’s dead. Alack the day!","She’s dead, deceased, she’s dead. Curse the day!"
"Alack the day. She’s dead, she’s dead, she’s dead!","Curse the day! She’s dead, she’s dead, she’s dead!"
"Ha? Let me see her. Out, alas! She’s cold. Her blood is settled, and her joints are stiff. Life and these lips have long been separated. Death lies on her like an untimely frost","No! Let me see her. Oh no! She’s cold. Her blood has stopped, and her joints are stiff. She’s been dead for some time. She’s dead, like a beautiful flower, killed by an unseasonable frost."
O lamentable day!,"Oh, sad day!"
O woeful time.,"Oh, this is a painful time!"
"Death, that hath ta'en her hence to make me wail, Ties up my tongue and will not let me speak.","Death, which has taken her away to make me cry, now ties up my tongue and won’t let me speak."
"Come, is the bride ready to go to church?","Come, is the bride ready to go to church?"
"O son! The night before thy wedding day Hath death lain with thy wife. There she lies, Flower as she was, deflowered by him.","She’s ready to go, but she’ll never return. (to PARIS) Oh son! On the night before your wedding day, death has taken your wife. There she lies. She was a flower, but death deflowered her."
"Death is my son-in-law. Death is my heir. And leave him all. Life, living, all is Death’s.","Death is my son-in-law. Death is my heir. My daughter married death. I will die and leave Death everything. Life, wealth, everything belongs to Death."
"Have I thought long to see this morning’s face, And doth it give me such a sight as this?","Have I waited so long to see this morning, only to see this?"
"Accursed, unhappy, wretched, hateful day! In lasting labor of his pilgrimage. But one, poor one, one poor and loving child, But one thing to rejoice and solace in, And cruel death hath catched it from my sight!","Accursed, unhappy, wretched, hateful day! This is the most miserable hour of all time! I had only one child, one poor child, one poor and loving child, the one thing I had to rejoice and comfort myself, and cruel Death has stolen it from me!"
"Most lamentable day, most woeful day That ever, ever, I did yet behold! O day, O day, O day, O hateful day! Never was seen so black a day as this.","Oh pain! Oh painful, painful, painful day! The saddest day, most painful day that I ever, ever did behold! Oh day! Oh day! Oh day! Oh hateful day! There has never been so black a day as today. Oh painful day, Oh painful day!"
"Beguiled, divorcèd, wrongèd, spited, slain! Most detestable Death, by thee beguiled, By cruel, cruel thee quite overthrown! O love! O life! Not life, but love in death.","She was tricked, divorced, wronged, spited, killed! Death, the most despicable thing, tricked her. Cruel, cruel Death killed her. Oh love! Oh life! There is no life, but my love is dead!"
"Uncomfortable time, why camest thou now To murder, murder our solemnity? O child, O child! My soul, and not my child! Dead art thou! Alack, my child is dead,","Despised, distressed, hated, martyred, killed! Why did this have to happen now? Why did Death have to ruin our wedding? Oh child! Oh child! My soul and not my child! You are dead! Oh no! My child is dead. My child will be buried, and so will my joys."
"Peace, ho, for shame! Confusion’s cure lives not In these confusions. Heaven and yourself Had part in this fair maid. Now heaven hath all,","Be quiet, for shame! The cure for confusion is not yelling and screaming. You had this child with the help of heaven. Now heaven has her."
"And all the better is it for the maid. But heaven keeps his part in eternal life. The most you sought was her promotion, For ’twas your heaven she should be advanced. And weep ye now, seeing she is advanced Oh, in this love, you love your child so ill That you run mad, seeing that she is well. She’s not well married that lives married long, But she’s best married that dies married young. On this fair corse, and, as the custom is, And in her best array, bear her to church. For though some nature bids us all lament, Yet nature’s tears are reason’s merriment.","She is in a better place. You could not prevent her from dying someday, but heaven will give her eternal life. The most you hope for was for her to marry wealthy and rise up the social ladder—that was your idea of heaven. And now you cry, even though she has risen up above the clouds, as high as heaven itself? Oh, in this love, you love your child so badly, that you go mad, even though she is in heaven. It is best to marry well and die young, better than to be married for a long time. Dry up your tears, and put your rosemary on this beautiful corpse. And, in accordance with custom, carry her to the church in her best clothes. It’s natural for us to shed tears for her, but the truth is, we should be happy for her."
"Turn from their office to black funeral. Our instruments to melancholy bells, Our wedding cheer to a sad burial feast. Our solemn hymns to sullen dirges change, And all things change them to the contrary.",All the things that we prepared for the wedding party will now be used for the funeral. Our happy music will now be sad. Our wedding banquet will become a sad burial feast. Our celebratory hymns will change to sad funeral marches. Our bridal flowers will cover a buried corpse. And everything will be used for the opposite purpose from what we intended.
"Sir, go you in, and, madam, go with him; And go, Sir Paris. Every one prepare To follow this fair corse unto her grave. Move them no more by crossing their high will.","Sir, you go in. And, madam, go with him. And you go too, Sir Paris. Everyone prepare to take this beautiful corpse to her grave. The heavens hang threateningly over you for some past sin. Don’t disturb the heavens any more by trying to go against heaven’s will."
"Faith, we may put up our pipes and be gone.","Well, we can put away our pipes and go home."
"Honest good fellows, ah, put up, put up, For, well you know, this is a pitiful case.","Honest good boys, ah, put 'em away, put 'em away. As you know, this is a sad case."
"Ay, by my troth, the case may be amended.","Yes, well, things could get better."
"Musicians, O musicians, “Heart’s Ease,” “Heart’s Ease.” O, an you will have me live, play “Heart’s Ease.”","Musicians, oh, musicians, play “Heart’s Ease,” “Heart’s Ease.” Oh, I’ll die if you don’t play “Heart’s Ease.”"
Why “Heart’s ease?”,Why “Heart’s Ease”?
"O musicians, because my heart itself plays “My Heart is Full.” O, play me some merry dump to comfort me.","Oh, musicians, because my heart is singing “My Heart is Full of Woe.” Oh, play me some happy sad song to comfort me."
"Not a dump, we. 'Tis no time to play now.","No, not a sad song. It’s not the right time to play."
You will not then?,"You won’t, then?"
No.,No.
I will then give it you soundly.,Then I’ll really give it to you.
What will you give us?,What will you give us?
"No money, on my faith, but the gleek. I will give you the minstrel.","No money, I swear. But I’ll play a trick on you. I’ll call you a minstrel."
Then I will give you the serving creature.,Then I’ll call you a serving-creature.
"Then will I lay the serving creature’s dagger on your pate. I will carry no crotchets. I’ll re you, I’ll fa you. Do you note me?",Then I’ll smack you on the head with the serving-creature’s knife. I won’t mess around. I’ll make you sing. Do you hear me?
"An you re us and fa us, you note us.","If you make us sing, you’ll hear us."
"Pray you, put up your dagger and put out your wit.","Please, put down your knife and stop kidding around."
Then have at you with my wit. I will dry-beat you with an iron wit and put up my iron dagger. Answer me like men.,"So you don’t like my kidding around! I’ll kid you to death, and then I’ll put down my knife. Answer me like men."
"(sings) When griping grief the heart doth wound And doleful dumps the mind oppress, Then music with her silver sound—","(sings) When sadness wounds your heart, And pain takes over your mind, Then music with her silver sound—"
"(speaks) Why “silver sound”? Why “music with her silver sound”? What say you, Simon Catling?","(speaks) Why the line “silver sound”? What do they mean, “music with her silver sound”? What do you say, Simon Catling Catling = a violin string Catling ?"
"Marry, sir, because silver hath a sweet sound.","Well, sir, because silver has a sweet sound."
"Prates.—What say you, Hugh Rebeck?","That’s a stupid answer! What do you say, Hugh Rebeck Rebeck = a fiddle Rebeck ?"
"I say, “silver sound” because musicians sound for silver.","I say “silver sound,” because musicians play to earn silver."
"Prates too.—What say you, James Soundpost?","Another studpid answer! What do you say, James Soundpost Soundpost = part of a violin Soundpost ?"
"Faith, I know not what to say.","Well, I don’t know what to say."
"Oh, I cry you mercy, you are the singer. I will say for you. It is “music with her silver sound” because musicians have no gold for sounding.","Oh, I beg your pardon. You’re the singer. I’ll answer for you. It is “music with her silver sound,” because musicians have no gold to use to make sounds."
(sings) Then music with her silver sound With speedy help doth lend redress.,(sings) Then music with her silver sound makes you feel just fine.
What a pestilent knave is this same!,"What an annoying man, this guy is!"
"Hang him, Jack! Come, we’ll in here, tarry for the mourners and stay dinner.","Forget about him, Jack! Come, we’ll go in there. We’ll wait for the mourners and stay for dinner."
"If I may trust the flattering truth of sleep, My dreams presage some joyful news at hand. My bosom’s lord sits lightly in his throne, And all this day an unaccustomed spirit I dreamt my lady came and found me dead— Strange dream, that gives a dead man leave to think— And breathed such life with kisses in my lips That I revived and was an emperor. When but love’s shadows are so rich in joy!","If I can trust my dreams, then some joyful news is coming soon. Love rules my heart, and all day long a strange feeling has been making me cheerful. I had a dream that my lady came and found me dead. It’s a strange dream that lets a dead man think! She came and brought me back to life by kissing my lips. I rose from the dead and was an emperor. Oh my! How sweet it would be to actually have the woman I love, when merely thinking about love makes me so happy."
"News from Verona!—How now, Balthasar? Dost thou not bring me letters from the friar? How doth my lady? Is my father well? For nothing can be ill if she be well.","Do you have news from Verona!—What is it, Balthasar? Do you bring me a letter from the friar? How is my wife? Is my father well? How is my Juliet? I ask that again because nothing can be wrong if she is well."
"Then she is well, and nothing can be ill. Her body sleeps in Capels' monument, And her immortal part with angels lives. And presently took post to tell it you. O, pardon me for bringing these ill news, Since you did leave it for my office, sir.","Then she is well, and nothing is wrong. Her body sleeps in the Capulet tomb, and her immortal soul lives with the angels in heaven. I saw her buried in her family’s tomb, and then I came here to tell you the news. Oh, pardon me for bringing this bad news, but you told me it was my job, sir."
"Is it e'en so? Then I defy you, stars! And hire post horses. I will hence tonight.","Is it really true? Then I rebel against you, stars! You know where I live. Get me some ink and paper, and hire some horses to ride. I will leave here for Verona tonight."
"I do beseech you, sir, have patience. Your looks are pale and wild, and do import Some misadventure.","Please, sir, have patience. You look pale and wild as if you’re going to hurt yourself."
Leave me and do the thing I bid thee do. Hast thou no letters to me from the friar?,"Tsk, you’re wrong. Leave me and do what I told you to do. Don’t you have a letter for me from the friar?"
"No, my good lord.","No, my good lord."
"No matter. Get thee gone,",No matter. Get on your way and hire those horses. I’ll be with you right away.
"Well, Juliet, I will lie with thee tonight. Let’s see for means. O mischief, thou art swift To enter in the thoughts of desperate men! I do remember an apothecary— In tattered weeds, with overwhelming brows, Culling of simples. Meager were his looks, Sharp misery had worn him to the bones, And in his needy shop a tortoise hung, Of ill-shaped fishes; and about his shelves A beggarly account of empty boxes, Green earthen pots, bladders and musty seeds, Remnants of packthread and old cakes of roses,","Well, Juliet, I’ll lie with you tonight. Let’s see how. Destructive thoughts come quickly to the minds of desperate men! I remember a pharmacist who lives nearby. I remember he wears shabby clothes and has bushy eyebrows. He makes drugs from herbs. He looks poor and miserable and worn out to the bone. He had a tortoise shell hanging up in his shop as well as a stuffed alligator and other skins of strange fish. There were a few empty boxes on his shelves, as well as green clay pots, and some musty seeds. There were a few strands of string and mashed rose petals on display."
"Noting this penury, to myself I said, “An if a man did need a poison now”— Whose sale is present death in Mantua— “Here lives a caitiff wretch would sell it him.” And this same needy man must sell it me. As I remember, this should be the house. Being holiday, the beggar’s shop is shut. What, ho! Apothecary!","Noticing all this poverty, I said to myself, “If a man needed some poison”—which they would immediately kill you for selling in Mantua—“here is a miserable wretch who’d sell it to him.” Oh, this idea came before I needed the poison. But this same poor man must sell it to me. As I remember, this should be the house. Today’s a holiday, so the beggar’s shop is shut. Hey! Pharmacist!"
Who calls so loud?,Who’s that calling so loud?
"Hold, there is forty ducats. Let me have A dram of poison, such soon-speeding gear As will disperse itself through all the veins That the life-weary taker may fall dead, As violently as hasty powder fired Doth hurry from the fatal cannon’s womb.","Come here, man. I see that you are poor. Here are forty ducats. Let me have a shot of poison, something that works so fast that the person who takes it will die as fast as gunpowder exploding in a canon."
"Such mortal drugs I have, but Mantua’s law Is death to any he that utters them.","I have lethal poisons like that. But it’s against the law to sell them in Mantua, and the penalty is death."
"And fear’st to die? Famine is in thy cheeks. Need and oppression starveth in thine eyes. Contempt and beggary hangs upon thy back. The world is not thy friend nor the world’s law. Then be not poor, but break it, and take this. (holds out money)","You’re this poor and wretched and still afraid to die? Your cheeks are thin because of hunger. I can see in your eyes that you’re starving. Anyone can see that you’re a beggar. The world is not your friend, and neither is the law. The world doesn’t make laws to make you rich. So don’t be poor. Break the law, and take this money. (he holds out money)"
"My poverty, but not my will, consents.","I agree because I’m poor, not because I want to."
I pay thy poverty and not thy will.,"I pay you because you’re poor, not because you want me to buy this."
"And drink it off; and, if you had the strength Of twenty men, it would dispatch you straight.","(gives ROMEO poison) Put this in any kind of liquid you want and drink it down. Even if you were as strong as twenty men, it would kill you immediately."
"(gives APOTHECARY money) There is thy gold, worse poison to men’s souls, Than these poor compounds that thou mayst not sell. I sell thee poison. Thou hast sold me none. Farewell. Buy food, and get thyself in flesh.— Come, cordial and not poison, go with me","(gives APOTHECARY money) There is your gold. Money is a worse poison to men’s souls, and commits more murders in this awful world, than these poor poisons that you’re not allowed to sell. I’ve sold you poison. You haven’t sold me any. Goodbye. Buy yourself food, and put some flesh on your bones. I’ll take this mixture, which is a medicine, not a poison, to Juliet’s grave. That’s where I must use it."
"Holy Franciscan Friar! Brother, ho!","Holy Franciscan Friar! Brother, hey!"
"This same should be the voice of Friar John. Welcome from Mantua. What says Romeo? Or, if his mind be writ, give me his letter.","That sounds like the voice of Friar John. Welcome back from Mantua. What does Romeo say? Or, if he wrote down his thoughts, give me his letter."
"One of our order, to associate me, Here in this city visiting the sick, And finding him, the searchers of the town, Suspecting that we both were in a house Sealed up the doors and would not let us forth. So that my speed to Mantua there was stayed.","I went to find another poor friar from our order to accompany me. He was here in this city visiting the sick. When I found him, the town health officials suspected that we were both in a house that had been hit with the plague. They quarantined the house, sealed up the doors, and refused to let us out. I couldn’t go to Mantua because I was stuck there."
"Who bare my letter, then, to Romeo?",Then who took my letter to Romeo?
"I could not send it—here it is again— Nor get a messenger to bring it thee, So fearful were they of infection.",I couldn’t send it. Here it is. (he gives FRIAR LAWRENCE a letter) I couldn’t get a messenger to bring it to you either because they were scared of spreading the infection.
"Unhappy fortune! By my brotherhood, The letter was not nice but full of charge, May do much danger. Friar John, go hence. Get me an iron crow and bring it straight Unto my cell.","Unhappy fortune! By my brotherhood, the letter was not just a nice greeting. It was full of very important information. It’s very dangerous that it hasn’t been sent. Friar John, go and get me an iron crowbar. Bring it straight back to my cell."
"Brother, I’ll go and bring it thee.","Brother, I’ll go and bring it to you."
"Now must I to the monument alone. She will beshrew me much that Romeo Hath had no notice of these accidents. But I will write again to Mantua, And keep her at my cell till Romeo come.","Now I must go to the tomb alone. Within three hours Juliet will wake up. She’ll be very angry with me that Romeo doesn’t know what happened. But I’ll write again to Mantua, and I’ll keep her in my cell until Romeo comes. That poor living corpse. She’s shut inside a dead man’s tomb!"
"Give me thy torch, boy. Hence, and stand aloof. Yet put it out, for I would not be seen. Under yon yew trees lay thee all along, Holding thine ear close to the hollow ground— Being loose, unfirm, with digging up of graves, But thou shalt hear it. Whistle then to me, As signal that thou hear’st something approach. Give me those flowers. Do as I bid thee, go.","Give me your torch, boy. Go away and stay apart from me. Put the torch out, so I can’t be seen. Hide under the yew-trees over there. Listen to make sure no one is coming through the graveyard. If you hear any one, whistle to me to signal that someone is approaching. Give me those flowers. Do as I tell you. Go."
Here in the churchyard. Yet I will adventure.,"(to himself) I am almost afraid to stand alone here in the graveyard, but I’ll take the risk."
"(scatters flowers at JULIET'S closed tomb) Sweet flower, with flowers thy bridal bed I strew— O woe! Thy canopy is dust and stones— Or, wanting that, with tears distilled by moans, The obsequies that I for thee will keep Nightly shall be to strew thy grave and weep.","(he scatters flowers at JULIET’s closed tomb) Sweet flower, I’m spreading flowers over your bridal bed. Oh, pain! Your canopy is dust and stones. I’ll water these flowers every night with sweet water. Or, if I don’t do that, my nightly rituals to remember you will be to put flowers on your grave and weep."
"The boy gives warning something doth approach. To cross my obsequies and true love’s rite? What with a torch! Muffle me, night, awhile.",The boy is warning me that someone approaches. Who could be walking around here tonight? Who’s ruining my rituals of true love? It’s someone with a torch! I must hide in the darkness for awhile.
"Give me that mattock and the wrenching iron. (takes them from BALTHASAR) See thou deliver it to my lord and father. (gives letter to BALTHASAR) Give me the light. (takes torch from BALTHASAR) Upon thy life I charge thee, And do not interrupt me in my course. Why I descend into this bed of death Is partly to behold my lady’s face, But chiefly to take thence from her dead finger In dear employment. Therefore hence, be gone. But if thou, jealous, dost return to pry In what I farther shall intend to do, By heaven, I will tear thee joint by joint The time and my intents are savage, wild, More fierce and more inexorable far Than empty tigers or the roaring sea. ","Give me that pickax and the crowbar. (he takes them from BALTHASAR) Here, take this letter. Early in the morning deliver it to my father. (he gives the letter to BALTHASAR) Give me the light. (he takes the torch from BALTHASAR) Swear on your life, I command you, whatever you hear or see, stay away from me and do not interrupt me in my plan. I’m going down into this tomb of the dead, partly to behold my wife’s face. But my main reason is to take a precious ring from her dead finger. I must use that ring for an important purpose. So go on your way. But if you get curious and return to spy on me, I swear I’ll tear you apart limb by limb and spread your body parts around to feed the hungry animals in the graveyard. My plan is wild and savage. I am more fierce in this endeavor than a hungry tiger or the raging sea."
"I will be gone, sir, and not trouble you.","I’ll go, sir, and I won’t bother you."
"So shalt thou show me friendship. Take thou that. (gives BALTHASAR money) Live and be prosperous, and farewell, good fellow.","That’s the way to show me friendship. Take this. (he gives BALTHASAR money) Live and be prosperous. Farewell, good fellow."
"(aside) For all this same, I’ll hide me hereabout.","(speaking so that only PARIS can hear) Despite what I said, I’ll hide nearby. I’m frightened by the look on his face, and I have doubts about his intentions."
"Thou detestable maw, thou womb of death, Gorged with the dearest morsel of the earth, Thus I enforce thy rotten jaws to open, And in despite I’ll cram thee with more food!",(speaking to the tomb) You horrible mouth of death! You’ve eaten up the dearest creature on Earth. Now I’m going to force open your rotten jaws and make you eat another body. (ROMEO begins to open the tomb with his tools)
"(aside) This is that banished haughty Montague, That murdered my love’s cousin, with which grief, It is supposed the fair creature died. And here is come to do some villainous shame to the dead bodies. I will apprehend him.","(speaking so that ROMEO can’t hear) It’s that arrogant Montague, the one who’s been banished. He’s the one who murdered my love’s cousin Tybalt. They think she died with grief for that cousin. This guy has come here to commit awful crimes against the dead bodies. I’ll catch him."
"(to ROMEO) Stop thy unhallowed toil, vile Montague! Can vengeance be pursued further than death? Condemnèd villain, I do apprehend thee. Obey and go with me, for thou must die.","(to ROMEO) Stop your evil work, vile Montague! Can you take revenge on dead bodies? Condemned villain, I’ve caught you. Obey and come with me. You must die."
"I must indeed, and therefore came I hither. Good gentle youth, tempt not a desperate man. Fly hence and leave me. Think upon these gone. Let them affright thee. I beseech thee, youth, By urging me to fury. O, be gone! By heaven, I love thee better than myself, For I come hither armed against myself. Stay not, be gone. Live, and hereafter say","I must indeed. That’s why I came here. Good and noble young man, don’t mess with someone who’s desperate. Get away from here and leave me. Think about the ones who have died. Let them put fear in your heart. Please, young man, don’t make me angry. I don’t want to commit another crime. Oh, go away! I swear, I love you more than I love myself. For I’ve come here with weapons to use against myself. Don’t stay here, go away. Live, and from now on, say a madman mercifully told you to run away."
I do defy thy commination And apprehend thee for a felon here.,I refuse your request. I’m arresting you as a criminal.
"Wilt thou provoke me? Then have at thee, boy!","Are you going to provoke me? Alright, let’s fight, boy!"
"O Lord, they fight! I will go call the watch.","Oh Lord, they’re fighting! I’ll go call the watch."
Open the tomb. Lay me with Juliet.,"(he falls) Oh, I’ve been killed! If you are merciful, open the tomb and lay me next to Juliet."
"In faith, I will.—Let me peruse this face. Mercutio’s kinsman, noble County Paris. What said my man, when my betossèd soul He told me Paris should have married Juliet. Said he not so? Or did I dream it so? Or am I mad, hearing him talk of Juliet, To think it was so?—O, give me thy hand, I’ll bury thee in a triumphant grave.","Alright, I will. Let me look at this face. It’s Mercutio’s relative, noble Count Paris! What did my man say? I was worried, so I wasn’t listening to him while we were riding. I think he told me Paris was about to marry Juliet. Isn’t that what he said? Or was I dreaming? Or am I crazy? Did I hear him say something about Juliet and jump to conclusions? Oh, give me your hand. Both of us had such bad luck! I’ll bury you in a magnificent grave."
"A grave? Oh, no. A lantern, slaughtered youth, For here lies Juliet, and her beauty makes This vault a feasting presence full of light. (lays PARIS in the tomb)","A grave? Oh no! This is a lantern, dead Paris. Juliet lies here, and her beauty fills this tomb with light. Dead men, lie there. You are being buried by another dead man. (he lays PARIS in the tomb)"
"How oft when men are at the point of death Have they been merry, which their keepers call A lightning before death! Oh, how may I Death, that hath sucked the honey of thy breath, Hath had no power yet upon thy beauty. Thou art not conquered. Beauty’s ensign yet Is crimson in thy lips and in thy cheeks, Tybalt, liest thou there in thy bloody sheet? O, what more favor can I do to thee, Than with that hand that cut thy youth in twain To sunder his that was thine enemy? Why art thou yet so fair? Shall I believe That unsubstantial death is amorous, And that the lean abhorrèd monster keeps Thee here in dark to be his paramour? And never from this palace of dim night Depart again. Here, here will I remain With worms that are thy chamber maids. Oh, here Will I set up my everlasting rest, From this world-wearied flesh. Eyes, look your last. Arms, take your last embrace. And, lips, O you The doors of breath, seal with a righteous kiss A dateless bargain to engrossing death. Come, bitter conduct, come, unsavoury guide. Thou desperate pilot, now at once run on The dashing rocks thy seasick, weary bark. Here’s to my love! (drinks the poison) O true apothecary,","How often are men happy right before they die! They call it the lightness before death. Oh, how can I call this lightness? Oh, my love! My wife! Death has sucked the honey from your breath, but it has not yet ruined your beauty. You haven’t been conquered. There is still red in your lips and in your cheeks. Death has not yet turned them pale. Tybalt, are you lying there in your bloody death shroud? Oh, what better favor can I do for you than to kill the man who killed you with the same hand that made you die young. Forgive me, cousin! Ah, dear Juliet, why are you still so beautiful? Should I believe that death is in love with you, and that the awful monster keeps you here to be his mistress? I don’t like that idea, so I’ll stay with you. And I will never leave this tomb. Here, here I’ll remain with worms that are your chamber-maids. Oh, I’ll rest here forever. I’ll forget about all the bad luck that has troubled me. Eyes, look out for the last time! Arms, make your last embrace! And lips, you are the doors of breath. Seal with a righteous kiss the deal I have made with death forever. (ROMEO kisses JULIET and takes out the poison) Come, bitter poison, come, unsavory guide! You desperate pilot, let’s crash this sea-weary ship into the rocks! Here’s to my love! ROMEO drinks the poison. Oh, that pharmacist was honest! His drugs work quickly. So I die with a kiss."
Saint Francis be my speed! How oft tonight Have my old feet stumbled at graves!—Who’s there?,"Saint Francis, help me! How often tonight have my old feet stumbled on gravestones! Who’s there?"
"Here’s one, a friend, and one that knows you well.","I’m a friend, a friend who knows you well."
"Bliss be upon you! Tell me, good my friend, To grubs and eyeless skulls? As I discern, It burneth in the Capels' monument.","God bless you! Tell me, my good friend, what is that light over there? The one that vainly lights up the darkness for worms and skulls without eyes? It looks to me like it’s burning in the Capulet tomb."
"It doth so, holy sir, and there’s my master, One that you love.","That is where it’s burning, father. My master is there. The one you love."
Who is it?,Who is it?
Romeo.,Romeo.
How long hath he been there?,How long has he been there?
Full half an hour.,For a full half hour.
Go with me to the vault.,Go with me to the tomb.
"I dare not, sir. My master knows not but I am gone hence, And fearfully did menace me with death If I did stay to look on his intents.","I don’t dare, sir. My master doesn’t know I’m still here. He threatened me with death if I stayed to look at what he was doing."
"Oh, much I fear some ill unthrifty thing.","Stay, then. I’ll go alone. I’m suddenly afraid. Oh, I’m very scared something awful has happened."
"As I did sleep under this yew tree here, I dreamt my master and another fought, And that my master slew him.","As I slept under this yew-tree here, I had a dream that my master and someone else were fighting and that my master killed him."
"Romeo!— Alack, alack, what blood is this, which stains The stony entrance of the sepulcher? What mean these masterless and gory swords To lie discolored by this place of peace? Romeo! O, pale!—Who else? What, Paris too? And steeped in blood?—Ah, what an unkind hour Is guilty of this lamentable chance! The lady stirs.","(approaching the tomb) Romeo! Oh no! What is this blood that stains the stony entrance of this tomb? Why are these bloody swords lying here, abandoned by their masters? Next to this place of peace? (he looks inside the tomb) Romeo! Oh, he’s pale! Who else? What, Paris too? And he’s covered in blood? Ah, when did these horrible things happen? The lady’s moving."
"I do remember well where I should be, And there I am. Where is my Romeo?","Oh friendly friar! Where is my husband? I remember very well where I should be, and here I am. Where is my Romeo?"
"I hear some noise. Lady, come from that nest Of death, contagion, and unnatural sleep. Hath thwarted our intents. Come, come away. Thy husband in thy bosom there lies dead, And Paris too. Come, I’ll dispose of thee Among a sisterhood of holy nuns. Come, go, good Juliet. I dare no longer stay.","I hear some noise. Lady, come out of the tomb. A greater power than we can fight has ruined our plan. Come, come away. Your husband lies dead there, and Paris too. Come, I’ll place you among the sisterhood of holy nuns. Don’t wait to ask questions. The watch is coming. Come, let’s go, good Juliet, I don’t dare stay any longer."
"Go, get thee hence, for I will not away.—","Go, get out of here. I’m not going anywhere."
"What’s here? A cup, closed in my true love’s hand? Poison, I see, hath been his timeless end.— To help me after? I will kiss thy lips. Haply some poison yet doth hang on them, To make me die with a restorative. (kisses ROMEO)","What’s this here? It’s a cup, closed in my true love’s hand? Poison, I see, has been the cause of his death. How rude! He drank it all, and didn’t leave any to help me afterward. I will kiss your lips. Perhaps there’s still some poison on them, to make me die with a medicinal kiss. (she kisses ROMEO) Your lips are warm."
"(to PAGE) Lead, boy. Which way?","(coming to the PAGE) Lead, boy. Which way?"
"Yea, noise? Then I’ll be brief. O happy dagger, This is thy sheath. There rust and let me die. (stabs herself with ROMEO’s dagger and dies)","Oh, noise? Then I’ll be quick. Oh, good, a knife! My body will be your sheath. Rust inside my body and let me die. (she stabs herself with ROMEO’s dagger and dies)"
"This is the place. There, where the torch doth burn.","This is the place. There, where the torch is burning."
"The ground is bloody.—Search about the churchyard. Go, some of you. Whoe'er you find, attach.","The ground is bloody. Search the graveyard. Go, some of you, arrest whoever you find."
"Pitiful sight! Here lies the county slain, And Juliet bleeding, warm and newly dead, Go, tell the Prince. Run to the Capulets. Raise up the Montagues. Some others search.","This is a pitiful sight! The count is dead. Juliet is bleeding. Her body is warm, and she seems to have been dead only a short time, even though she has been buried for two days. Go, tell the Prince. Run to the Capulets. Wake up the Montagues. Have some others search."
"We see the ground whereon these woes do lie, We cannot without circumstance descry.",We see the cause of all this pain. But we’ll have to investigate to discover the whole story.
Here’s Romeo’s man. We found him in the churchyard.,Here’s Romeo’s man. We found him in the churchyard.
Hold him in safety till the Prince come hither.,Hold him in custody until the Prince gets here.
"Here is a friar that trembles, sighs and weeps. As he was coming from this churchyard’s side.","Here is a friar who’s trembling, sighing and weeping. We took this pickax and this shovel from him, as he was walking from this side of the graveyard."
A great suspicion. Stay the friar too.,Very suspicious. Hold the friar too.
What misadventure is so early up That calls our person from our morning rest?,What crimes happen so early in the morning that I have to wake up before the usual time?
What should it be that is so shrieked abroad?,"What’s the problem, that they cry out so loud?"
"Oh, the people in the street cry “Romeo,” Some “Juliet,” and some “Paris,” and all run With open outcry toward our monument.","Some people in the street are crying “Romeo.” Some are crying “Juliet,” and some are crying “Paris.” They’re all running in an open riot toward our tomb."
What fear is this which startles in our ears?,What’s this awful thing that everyone’s crying about?
"And Romeo dead, and Juliet, dead before, Warm and new killed.","Prince, here lies Count Paris killed. And Romeo dead. And Juliet. She was dead before, but now she’s warm and hasn’t been dead for long."
"Search, seek, and know how this foul murder comes.",Investigate how this foul murder came about.
"Here is a friar, and slaughtered Romeo’s man, These dead men’s tombs.","Here is a friar, and dead Romeo’s man. They’ve got tools on them—tools they could use to open these tombs."
"O heavens! O wife, look how our daughter bleeds! This dagger hath mista'en—for, lo, his house Is empty on the back of Montague,","Oh heavens! Oh wife, look at how our daughter bleeds! That knife should be in its sheath on that Montague’s back, but instead it’s mis-sheathed in my daughter’s breast."
"O me! This sight of death is as a bell, That warns my old age to a sepulcher.",Oh my! This sight of death is like a bell that warns me I’m old and I’ll die soon.
"Come, Montague, for thou art early up To see thy son and heir now early down.","Come, Montague. You’re up early to see your son down early."
Grief of my son’s exile hath stopped her breath. What further woe conspires against mine age?,"Oh, my liege, my wife died tonight. Sadness over my son’s exile stopped her breath. What further pain must I endure in my old age?"
"Look, and thou shalt see.","Look, and you’ll see."
"(to ROMEO) O thou untaught! What manners is in this,","(seeing ROMEO's body) Oh, you undisciplined boy! Where are your manners? It’s not right for a son to push past his father on his way to the grave."
"Seal up the mouth of outrage for a while, Till we can clear these ambiguities And know their spring, their head, their true descent, And then will I be general of your woes, And let mischance be slave to patience.— Bring forth the parties of suspicion.","Be quiet and hold back your remarks of outrage, until we can clear up these questions. We want to know how it started and what really happened. And then I’ll be the leader of pain, and maybe I’ll lead you as far as death. In the meantime, hold on, and be patient. Bring forth the men under suspicion."
"I am the greatest, able to do least, Yet most suspected, as the time and place And here I stand, both to impeach and purge, Myself condemnèd and myself excused.","I am the greatest, but I was able to do the least. I am under the most suspicion, because I was here at the time of this awful murder. And here I stand, you can question me and punish me. I have already condemned and excused myself."
Then say at once what thou dost know in this.,Tell us what you know about this affair.
"I will be brief, for my short date of breath Romeo, there dead, was husband to that Juliet, And she, there dead, that Romeo’s faithful wife. I married them, and their stol'n marriage day Was Tybalt’s doomsday, whose untimely death For whom, and not for Tybalt, Juliet pined. You, to remove that siege of grief from her, Betrothed and would have married her perforce To County Paris. Then comes she to me, To rid her from this second marriage, Or in my cell there would she kill herself. Then gave I her, so tutored by my art, A sleeping potion, which so took effect The form of death.","I will be brief because I’m not going to live long enough to tell a boring story. Romeo, who lies there dead, was the husband of that Juliet. And she, who lies there dead, was that Romeo’s faithful wife. I married them; their secret wedding day was the day Tybalt died. His untimely death caused the bridegroom to be banished from the city. Juliet was sad because Romeo was gone, not because of Tybalt’s death. To cure her sadness, you arranged a marriage for her with Count Paris. Then she came to me, and, looking wild, she asked me to devise a plan to get her out of this second marriage. She threatened to kill herself in my cell if I didn’t help her. So I gave her a sleeping potion that I had mixed with my special skills. It worked as planned. She seemed to everyone to be dead."
"Meantime I writ to Romeo, That he should hither come as this dire night, To help to take her from her borrowed grave, Being the time the potion’s force should cease. Was stayed by accident, and yesternight Returned my letter back. Then all alone At the prefixèd hour of her waking Came I to take her from her kindred’s vault, Till I conveniently could send to Romeo, But when I came, some minute ere the time Of her awakening, here untimely lay The noble Paris and true Romeo dead. And bear this work of heaven with patience. But then a noise did scare me from the tomb, And she, too desperate, would not go with me, But, as it seems, did violence on herself. Her Nurse is privy. And if aught in this Miscarried by my fault, let my old life Be sacrificed some hour before his time Unto the rigor of severest law.","In the meantime I wrote to Romeo and told him to come here on this awful night to help remove her from her temporary grave when the sleeping potion wore off. But the man who carried my letter, Friar John, was held up by an accident. Last night he gave me the letter back. So I came here alone at the hour when she was supposed to wake up. I came to take her out of her family’s tomb, hoping to hide her in my cell until I could make contact with Romeo. But by the time I got here, just a few minutes before Juliet woke up, Paris and Romeo were already dead. She woke up, and I asked her to come out of the tomb with me and endure this tragedy with patience. But then a noise sent me running scared from the tomb. She was too desperate to come with me, and it seems that she killed herself. I know all of this. And her Nurse knows about the marriage too. If any part of this tragedy is my fault, let my old life be sacrificed and let me suffer the most severe punishment."
Where’s Romeo’s man? What can he say in this?,We have always known you to be a holy man. Where’s Romeo’s man? What does he have to say about this?
"I brought my master news of Juliet’s death, And then in post he came from Mantua To this same place, to this same monument. And threatened me with death, going in the vault, If I departed not and left him there.","I brought my master news of Juliet’s death. And then he rode from Mantua here to this tomb. (he shows a letter) Earlier this morning he asked me to give this letter to his father. When he went into the vault, he threatened me with death if I didn’t leave him alone there."
"Give me the letter. I will look on it. (takes letter from BALTHASAR) Sirrah, what made your master in this place?","Give me the letter. I’ll look at it. (he takes the letter from BALTHASAR) Where is the count’s page, the one who called the watch? Boy, what was your master doing here?"
"He came with flowers to strew his lady’s grave, And bid me stand aloof, and so I did. Anon comes one with light to ope the tomb, And then I ran away to call the watch.","He came with flowers to spread on his lady’s grave. And he asked me to stand far away and leave him alone, and so I did. Then someone with a torch came to open the tomb. So my master drew on him. And then I ran away to call the watch."
"(skims the letter) This letter doth make good the friar’s words, Their course of love, the tidings of her death. And here he writes that he did buy a poison Came to this vault to die and lie with Juliet. Where be these enemies?—Capulet! Montague! See what a scourge is laid upon your hate, That heaven finds means to kill your joys with love! Have lost a brace of kinsmen. All are punished.","(skimming the letter) This letter confirms the friar’s account. It describes the course of their love and mentions the news of her death. Here he writes that he bought poison from a poor pharmacist. He brought that poison with him to this vault to die and lie with Juliet. Where are these enemies? Capulet! Montague! Do you see what a great evil results from your hate? Heaven has figured out how to kill your joys with love. Because I looked the other way when your feud flared up, I’ve lost several members of my family as well. Everyone is punished."
"O brother Montague, give me thy hand. This is my daughter’s jointure, for no more Can I demand.","Oh, brother Montague, give me your hand. This is my daughter’s dowry. I can ask you for nothing more."
"But I can give thee more, That whiles Verona by that name is known, There shall no figure at such rate be set As that of true and faithful Juliet.","But I can give you more. I’ll raise her statue in pure gold. As long as this city is called Verona, there will be no figure praised more than that of true and faithful Juliet."
"As rich shall Romeo’s by his lady’s lie,",The statue I will make of Romeo to lie beside his Juliet will be just as rich. They were poor sacrifices of our rivalry!
"A glooming peace this morning with it brings. The sun, for sorrow, will not show his head. Go hence, to have more talk of these sad things. Some shall be pardoned, and some punishèd. Than this of Juliet and her Romeo.","We settle a dark peace this morning. The sun is too sad to show itself. Let’s go, to talk about these sad things some more. Some will be pardoned, and some will be punished. There was never a story more full of pain than the story of Romeo and Juliet."
