"I’ll pheeze you, in faith.","I’ll fix you, I swear."
"A pair of stocks, you rogue!",You thug! I’ll call for a pair of stocks The “stocks” consisted of a wooden frame in which you could lock a criminal’s ankles so that he or she couldn’t move. stocks !
"Y'are a baggage, the Slys are no rogues. Look in the chronicles—we came in with Richard Conqueror. Therefore paucas pallabris: let the world slide. Sessa!","There are no thugs in my family, whore! Read your history! We Slys Sly means William the Conqueror; he is saying he can trace his family back to the time of England’s first king, but gets the name wrong. Slys came over with Richard the Conqueror. Oh, the hell with it. I can’t be bothered. Shut up!"
You will not pay for the glasses you have burst?,You won’t pay for the glasses you smashed?
"No, not a denier. Go by, Saint Jeronimy. Go to thy cold bed and warm thee.","No, not a penny. Get out of my face. Go play with yourself."
I know my remedy. I must go fetch the thirdborough.,I know my rights. I’ll call a policeman.
"Third, or fourth, or fifth borough, I’ll answer him by law.","Call them all! I have a legal right to be here. I’m not moving an inch, pal. Let them come—I don’t care."
"Huntsman, I charge thee, tender well my hounds. Breathe Merriman, the poor cur is embossed, And couple Clowder with the deep-mouthed brach. Saw’st thou not, boy, how Silver made it good I would not lose the dog for twenty pound.","Huntsman, look after my hounds. Let Merriman catch his breath—the poor dog’s foaming at the mouth. And tie up Clowder together with the long-mouthed bitch. (to his page) Did you see, boy, how Silver picked up the scent at the hedge corner, where it was weakest? I wouldn’t part with that dog for twenty pounds."
"Why, Belman is as good as he, my lord. He cried upon it at the merest loss, And twice today picked out the dullest scent.","I think Belman is just as good, my lord. He set up a howl when the scent was lost completely and twice picked it up where it was weakest. I swear he’s the better dog."
"Thou art a fool. If Echo were as fleet, I would esteem him worth a dozen such. But sup them well and look unto them all. Tomorrow I intend to hunt again.","You’re a fool. If Echo were as fast, he would be worth a dozen like Belman. But give them all a good dinner and look after them well. I’ll go hunting again tomorrow, I think."
"I will, my lord.","I will, my lord."
"What’s here? One dead, or drunk? See, doth he breathe?",What’s this? A drunkard or a corpse? Check and see if he’s breathing.
"He breathes, my lord. Were he not warmed with ale, This were a bed but cold to sleep so soundly.","He is, my lord. But this would be too cold a place to sleep if he hadn’t warmed himself with ale."
"O monstrous beast, how like a swine he lies! Sirs, I will practice on this drunken man. What think you: if he were conveyed to bed, Wrapped in sweet clothes, rings put upon his fingers, A most delicious banquet by his bed, Would not the beggar then forget himself?","It’s disgusting, sleeping that way—like a pig in the gutter! Alas, grim death, how vile and ugly your near-twin, sleep, is! Gentlemen, I think I’ll play a trick on this lout. What do you think? Say we were to carry him to one of the bedrooms, put fresh clothes on him and rings on his fingers, lay out a wonderful feast by his bed, and have servants in fancy dress near him when he wakes up—wouldn’t the poor tramp be confused?"
"Believe me, lord, I think he cannot choose.","I don’t think he’d have any choice, my lord."
It would seem strange unto him when he waked.,"When he woke, he wouldn’t know where he was."
"Even as a flatt'ring dream or worthless fancy. Carry him gently to my fairest chamber And hang it round with all my wanton pictures. Balm his foul head in warm distilled waters And burn sweet wood to make the lodging sweet. To make a dulcet and a heavenly sound. And if he chance to speak, be ready straight And with a low submissive reverence Say, “What is it your Honor will command?” Full of rose-water and bestrewed with flowers, Another bear the ewer, the third a diaper, And say, “Will ’t please your Lordship cool your hands?” Someone be ready with a costly suit Another tell him of his hounds and horse, And that his lady mourns at his disease. Persuade him that he hath been lunatic, And when he says he is, say that he dreams, This do, and do it kindly, gentle sirs. It will be pastime passing excellent If it be husbanded with modesty.","It would be just like a nice daydream or fantasy. Well, take him on up and we’ll try to pull it off. Carry him to my best room—gently, so he doesn’t wake—and hang all my erotic paintings around him. Bathe his filthy head with warm, scented water. Burn fragrant wood to give the room a pleasant smell, and have musicians at hand, ready to produce sweet, soothing sounds when he awakes. You want to be ready in case he speaks. If he does, bow low and say deferentially, “What would your Honor have us do?” Have one servant wait on him with a basin of rosewater (throw in some petals), have another servant carry a pitcher, and a third a cloth. Say, “Would your Lordship care to freshen up?” Have someone standing by with expensive clothes, and ask him what he’d care to wear. Have another servant tell him about the dogs and horses that he owns and that his wife is grief-stricken over his illness. Convince him that he has been out of his mind—and when he says he’s out of his mind now, tell him he’s mistaken and that he is in fact a mighty lord. Do this—make it convincing—and we’ll have fun. It could work if it’s done subtly."
"My lord, I warrant you we will play our part He is no less than what we say he is.","My lord, I promise we will play our parts so skillfully that he will believe everything we tell him."
"Take him up gently, and to bed with him, And each one to his office when he wakes.","Carry him gently to bed, and every man be ready at his post when he awakes."
"Sirrah, go see what trumpet ’tis that sounds.","Go, lad, and find out what the trumpet’s sounding for."
"Traveling some journey, to repose him here.","It’s probably some noble gentleman stopping off in mid-journey, thinking to spend the night here."
How now! who is it?,"Well, who is it?"
"An’t please your Honor, players That offer service to your Lordship.","Sir, it’s a troupe of actors who want to perform for your Lordship."
Bid them come near.,Have them come in.
"Now, fellows, you are welcome.","You are welcome here, my friends."
We thank your Honor.,We thank your Honor.
Do you intend to stay with me tonight?,Were you thinking of spending the night here?
So please your Lordship to accept our duty.,"Yes, if that would be all right with your Lordship."
"With all my heart. This fellow I remember 'Twas where you wooed the gentlewoman so well. I have forgot your name, but sure that part Was aptly fitted and naturally performed.","By all means. I remember this fellow—he once played the eldest son of a farmer. It was the play in which you wooed the gentlewoman so successfully. I have forgotten your name, but you were well cast in the role and played it convincingly."
I think ’twas Soto that your Honor means.,I believe your Honor is thinking of a character called Soto.
"Well, you are come to me in happy time, The rather for I have some sport in hand Wherein your cunning can assist me much. There is a lord will hear you play tonight; Lest over-eyeing of his odd behavior— For yet his Honor never heard a play— You break into some merry passion And so offend him. For I tell you, sirs,","Yes, that was it. You gave an excellent performance. Well, this is very fortunate, your arriving just at this moment. I happen to be planning a little entertainment and could really use your services. There is a particular lord who will watch you perform tonight. I’m a little worried, though—because his Honor has never seen a play before—that his odd behavior may strike you as funny. You might not be able to control your laughter and you might offend him. I warn you, he’s sensitive. The slightest smile provokes him."
"Fear not, my lord, we can contain ourselves Were he the veriest antic in the world.",Don’t worry. We’ll restrain ourselves—no matter how bizarrely he behaves.
"Go, sirrah, take them to the buttery And give them friendly welcome every one.","Go, lad, and take them to the pantry. Make them feel welcome and see to it that they have everything they require."
"Sirrah, go you to Barthol’mew, my page, And see him dressed in all suits like a lady. That done, conduct him to the drunkard’s chamber And call him “madam,” do him obeisance. He bear himself with honorable action, Such as he hath observed in noble ladies Unto their lords, by them accomplishèd.","You, fellow, go fetch my page, Bartholomew, and dress him up like a noble lady. When you’ve finished, bring him to the drunkard’s room, address him as “madam,” bow to him and treat him with all-round respect and deference, as though he were the lady of the house. Give him this message: if he wants to please me, he will conduct himself like a member of the aristocracy, mimicking the kind of behavior he’s seen noble ladies use toward their husbands."
"Such duty to the drunkard let him do And say, “What is ’t your Honor will command, Wherein your lady and your humble wife May show her duty and make known her love?” And then with kind embracements, tempting kisses, Bid him shed tears, as being overjoyed To see her noble lord restored to health, Who for this seven years hath esteemed him No better than a poor and loathsome beggar. To rain a shower of commanded tears, An onion will do well for such a shift, Which in a napkin being close conveyed Shall in despite enforce a watery eye. Anon I’ll give thee more instructions.","That’s just how I want him to behave toward the drunkard, speaking in a low, soft voice and in humble, courteous tones and saying fancy stuff like, “What does your Honor wish to command your lady, your humble wife, to do to show her devotion and demonstrate her love?” Tell him to give the drunkard fond embraces and alluring kisses, and lay his head on the other man’s breast, weeping like a woman overjoyed to see a husband restored to health who for the last seven years has imagined he was no better than a poor, pathetic beggar. The boy may lack a woman’s gift for weeping at will, so it might be good to have an onion handy, hidden in a handkerchief. That’ll make his eyes stream. Get this done as quickly as you can. I’ll give you more instructions later."
"I know the boy will well usurp the grace, Voice, gait, and action of a gentlewoman. I long to hear him call the drunkard “husband,” When they do homage to this simple peasant. I’ll in to counsel them. Haply my presence May well abate the over-merry spleen Which otherwise would grow into extremes.","I know the boy will be a convincing gentlewoman, taking up her exact walk and talk and gentle gestures. I can’t wait to hear him call the drunkard “husband,” and to watch my men smother their laughter as they pay their respects to this simple peasant. I’ll go and coach them. My presence may put a damper on their high spirits, which might otherwise get out of control."
"For God’s sake, a pot of small ale.","For God’s sake, would someone bring me a mug of beer!"
Will ’t please your Lordship drink a cup of sack?,Wouldn’t your Lordship prefer some imported wine?
Will ’t please your Honor taste of these conserves?,Would your Honor like to try this dried fruit?
What raiment will your Honor wear today?,What garment would your Honor like to wear today?
"I am Christophero Sly. Call not me “Honor” nor “Lordship.” I ne'er drank sack in my life. An if you give me any conserves, give me conserves of beef. Ne'er ask me what raiment I’ll wear, for I have no more doublets than backs, no more stockings than legs, nor no more shoes than feet, nay sometime more feet than shoes, or such shoes as my toes look through the over-leather.","I’m Christopher Sly. Don’t call me “your Honor” and “your Lordship.” I’ve never had imported wine in my life, and if you want to bring me something “dried,” try beef jerky. Why ask me what “garment” I’ll wear? I have no more jackets than I have backs, no more leggings than I have legs, and no more shoes than I have feet—in fact, sometimes I have fewer shoes than feet, as I’m not sure the ones where my toes stick out can be called “shoes.”"
"Heaven cease this idle humor in your Honor! Oh, that a mighty man of such descent, Of such possessions and so high esteem, Should be infusèd with so foul a spirit!","May Heaven put an end to this foolish fantasy of your Honor’s! How terrible that a man of your influence and noble family, with so much wealth and an excellent reputation, should be infected with such a horrible illness!"
"What, would you make me mad? Am not I Christopher Sly, old Sly’s son of Burton Heath, by birth a peddler, by education a cardmaker, by transmutation a bearherd, and now by present profession a tinker? Ask Marian Hacket, the fat alewife of Wincot, if she know me not! If she say I am not fourteen pence on the score for sheer ale, score me up for the lying’st knave in Christendom. What! I am not bestraught! Here’s—","What, are you trying to make me crazy? I’m Christopher Sly, son of old Sly of Barton-on-Heath, a peddler by birth, a cardmaker A cardmaker made tools for working with wool. cardmaker by trade, a keeper of trained bears by bad luck, and now, by present profession, a tinker. Go ask Marian Hacket, the fat innkeeper of Wincot. She knows me! She’ll tell you about the tab I’ve run up—fourteen pence just for ale. If she doesn’t, call me the biggest liar in Christendom. I’m not crazy! Just look at how—"
"Oh, this it is that makes your lady mourn!","Oh, this is why your poor wife is mourning!"
"Oh, this is it that makes your servants droop!",And this is why your servants hang their heads in sorrow!
"Hence comes it that your kindred shuns your house, As beaten hence by your strange lunacy. Call home thy ancient thoughts from banishment, And banish hence these abject lowly dreams. Look how thy servants do attend on thee, Each in his office ready at thy beck.","And this is why your relatives never visit, frightened away by this unnatural insanity of yours. Oh noble lord, consider your lineage. Try to recall your former state of mental health and forget these crass, lowly desires. Look how your servants wait on you, each one ready to do whatever you command. Would you care to hear some music? Listen! That’s Apollo Apollo was the Greek god of music and song. Apollo playing."
"And twenty cagèd nightingales do sing: Or wilt thou sleep? We’ll have thee to a couch Softer and sweeter than the lustful bed On purpose trimmed up for Semiramis. Or wilt thou ride? Thy horses shall be trapped, Their harness studded all with gold and pearl. Dost thou love hawking? Thou hast hawks will soar Above the morning lark. Or wilt thou hunt? And fetch shrill echoes from the hollow earth.","And those birds you hear—twenty caged nightingales. Do you want to sleep? We’ll have a couch made up that’s softer and more fragrant even than the bed of lustful Semiramis Semiramis was an Assyrian queen famous for her active sex life. Semiramis . Say you want to take a walk, and we’ll sprinkle the ground with flowers. Or do you want to go horseback riding? Your horses will be adorned with harnesses decorated in gold and pearls. Do you like hawking? You have hawks that can soar higher than the morning lark. Or do you want to hunt? Your hounds will make the sky echo with their high-pitched voices."
"Say thou wilt course. Thy greyhounds are as swift As breathed stags, ay, fleeter than the roe.","If you care to hunt rabbits, your greyhounds are as swift as healthy stags and faster than young deer."
"Dost thou love pictures? We will fetch thee straight And Cytherea all in sedges hid, Which seem to move and wanton with her breath, Even as the waving sedges play with wind.","Do you like pictures? We’ll be right back with one of Adonis Adonis was a handsome mortal youth loved by Venus, the goddess of love. Cytherea is another name for Venus (in Greek, Aphrodite). Adonis stretched out beside a rushing brook, with Venus spying on him, hidden in rushes that seem to move and undulate with her lustful sighs, like grass waving in the wind."
We’ll show thee Io as she was a maid As lively painted as the deed was done.,"There’s one that shows Io as a maid, before she was turned into a cow, in which Jupiter Io was a mortal girl whom the goal Zeus (called Jupiter by Romans) raped. Out of jealousy, Zeus wife transformed her into a cow. Jupiter tricks and takes her. It’s so realistic, it seems to be happening right before your eyes. "
"Or Daphne roaming through a thorny wood, Scratching her legs that one shall swear she bleeds, And at that sight shall sad Apollo weep,","There’s one of Daphne Daphne was a nymph whom Apollo loved and changed into a tree as she was trying to escape from him. Daphne running through the woods, her legs so scratched by thorns that Apollo himself would weep at the sight. You’ll swear the blood and tears are real."
"Thou art a lord, and nothing but a lord. Thou hast a lady far more beautiful Than any woman in this waning age.",You are nothing less than a lord. You have a noble wife who is much more beautiful than any other woman in this declining age.
And till the tears that she hath shed for thee She was the fairest creature in the world— And yet she is inferior to none.,"Before she began shedding tears all over her lovely face, she was the fairest creature in the world—and even now she has no equal."
"Am I a lord, and have I such a lady? Or do I dream? Or have I dreamed till now? I smell sweet savors and I feel soft things. Upon my life, I am a lord indeed And not a tinker, nor Christopher Sly. Well, bring our lady hither to our sight,","I’m really a lord? And do I really have a wife like that? Is this a dream? Or has everything up till now been a dream? I don’t seem to be asleep: I can see and hear and speak. I can smell sweet smells and feel things that are soft to the touch. I’ll be damned! I guess I really am a lord and not a tinker, and not Christopher Sly, either. Well, bring my wife to me. Oh, and don’t forget the beer."
"Will ’t please your Mightiness to wash your hands? O, how we joy to see your wit restored! O, that once more you knew but what you are! These fifteen years you have been in a dream","Would your Mightiness care to wash his hands? We’re overjoyed to see you sane again. If only you had a clearer memory of who you are! These past fifteen years you have been living in a dream, and even when you were awake, it was as though you slept."
"These fifteen years! By my fay, a goodly nap. But did I never speak of all that time?",Fifteen years! That’s some nap. But I never spoke the whole time?
"O, yes, my lord, but very idle words. For though you lay here in this goodly chamber, And rail upon the hostess of the house, And say you would present her at the leet, Because she brought stone jugs and no sealed quarts. Sometimes you would call out for Cicely Hacket.","Oh yes, you spoke, my lord, but total nonsense. For instance, you’d be lying here in this comfortable room, but you’d say that you were being thrown out of some tavern and would shout at a landlady about how you were going to take her to court for cheating you. Sometimes you would call out for one Cicely Hacket."
"Ay, the woman’s maid of the house.","Yes, the landlady’s maid."
"Why, sir, you know no house nor no such maid, Nor no such men as you have reckoned up, As Stephen Sly and old John Naps of Greece, And Peter Turph and Henry Pimpernell, Which never were, nor no man ever saw.","But sir, there is no such house, no such maid, and no such men as you have dreamed up, like a certain Stephen Sly and one old John Naps of Greece, a Peter Turph, one “Henry Pimpernell,” and twenty more men of this sort—who never actually existed."
Now Lord be thanked for my good amends!,"Well, thank God I’m cured!"
Amen.,Amen.
I thank thee. Thou shalt not lose by it.,I thank you all. You won’t regret this.
How fares my noble lord?,How is my noble lord?
"Marry, I fare well, For here is cheer enough. Where is my wife?","Not bad, actually. This is all quite pleasant. Where is my wife?"
"Here, noble lord. What is thy will with her?","Here, noble lord. What is your wish with regard to her?"
Are you my wife and will not call me “husband”? My men should call me “lord.” I am your goodman.,"You call yourself my wife, yet you don’t call me “husband”? It’s my men who should call me “lord.” I’m your man, your fellow."
I am your wife in all obedience.,My husband is my lord and my lord is my husband. For I am your all-obedient wife.
I know it well.—What must I call her?,"Yes, I see.—(to the LORD) What should I call her?"
“Madam.”,“Madam.”
"“Alice Madam,” or “Joan Madam”?","“ Madam Sly is asking what her name is. He doesn’t understand that “Madam” is like “Sir,” or “My lord.” Madam Alice?” Or “Madam Joan?”"
"“Madam,” and nothing else. So lords call ladies.",Just “madam.” That’s how noblemen address their wives.
And slept above some fifteen year or more.,"Madam wife, they say I’ve been dreaming or asleep for more than fifteen years."
"Ay, and the time seems thirty unto me, Being all this time abandoned from your bed.","Yes, and it seemed twice as long to me, having been kept from your bed that whole time."
"'Tis much.—Servants, leave me and her alone.","That’s too long.—Servants, leave her and me alone. Now, madam, undress and come to bed."
"Thrice noble lord, let me entreat of you To pardon me yet for a night or two, Or if not so, until the sun be set. For your physicians have expressly charged, That I should yet absent me from your bed. I hope this reason stands for my excuse.","Thrice noble lord, I beg you to excuse me for another night or two—or at least until nightfall. Your doctors have expressly forbidden me to sleep with you, as there’s a risk that you might have a relapse. I hope this explanation will stand as my excuse."
"Ay, it stands so that I may hardly tarry so long. But I would be loath to fall into my dreams again. I will therefore tarry in despite of the flesh and the blood.","Well, something’s standing up. I’m not sure I can wait that long. Still, I’d hate to see my former dreams return. So I will wait, however flesh and blood Sly means that he is sexually aroused. flesh and blood may feel about it."
"Your Honor’s players, hearing your amendment, For so your doctors hold it very meet, Seeing too much sadness hath congealed your blood, And melancholy is the nurse of frenzy. Therefore they thought it good you hear a play Which bars a thousand harms and lengthens life.","Your Honor’s actors, hearing of your recovery, have come to perform a pleasing comedy for you—and your doctors approve wholeheartedly. They say that too much suffering has made your blood coagulate, and that sadness leads to madness. So they think it’s a good idea for you to watch a play and direct your thoughts toward laughter and merriment—two strong preventive medicines that foster long life."
"Marry, I will. Let them play it. Is not a comonty a Christmas gambold or a tumbling-trick?","Okay, bring on the play. But what’s a “ comonty With “comonty,” Sly is trying to say “comedy” but gets the word wrong, never having heard it before. comonty ?” Some sort of Christmas skit or display of acrobatics?"
"No, my good lord, it is more pleasing stuff.","No, my good lord, this is nicer stuff."
"What, household stuff?","What, like stuff from a house?"
It is a kind of history.,"No, it’s a story."
"Well, we’ll see ’t. Come, madam wife, sit by my side and let the world slip. We shall ne'er be younger.","Well, let’s watch it. Come, madam wife, sit here beside me. Let’s forget our cares. We’re not getting any younger."
"Tranio, since for the great desire I had To see fair Padua, nursery of arts, I am arrived for fruitful Lombardy, The pleasant garden of great Italy, With his goodwill and thy good company. My trusty servant, well approved in all, Here let us breathe and haply institute A course of learning and ingenious studies. Gave me my being and my father first, A merchant of great traffic through the world, Vincentio, come of the Bentivolii. Vincentio’s son, brought up in Florence, To deck his fortune with his virtuous deeds. And therefore, Tranio, for the time I study Virtue, and that part of philosophy Will I apply that treats of happiness Tell me thy mind, for I have Pisa left And am to Padua come, as he that leaves A shallow plash to plunge him in the deep And with satiety seeks to quench his thirst.","Well, Tranio, here we are in fertile Lombardy, garden of Italy, about to fulfill my lifelong dream. You know how I’ve always longed to see the fair city of Padua, famous for its arts and letters, and now, thanks to my father’s generosity, here I am—with his blessing and your good company. So, my trusty servant—and you’ve never let me down—why don’t we settle here for a time to institute a course of study, a really rigorous curriculum. I was born in Pisa, famous for its serious citizens, like my father before me; my father, Vincentio, a successful, world-traveled merchant, was one of the Bentivolii The Bentivolis were one of the leading families of Bologna, wielding great political power and influence. Bentivolii . It’s only fitting that I, his son, reared in Florence, should concentrate on adding more virtuous deeds to my father’s own, stacking them on top of his wealth. For this reason, Tranio, I’ll study ethics and—for the time being, anyway—pursue those areas of philosophy Lucentio is referring to the philosophy of Aristotle. philosophy that teach a man how to achieve happiness through virtue. What do you think of all this? Leaving Pisa for Padua, I feel Lucentio means he is overwhelmed. I feel a little like a thirsty man who turns from a puddle to a vast lake he can drink from."
"I am in all affected as yourself, Glad that you thus continue your resolve To suck the sweets of sweet philosophy. Only, good master, while we do admire Let’s be no stoics nor no stocks, I pray, Or so devote to Aristotle’s checks As Ovid be an outcast quite abjured. Balk logic with acquaintance that you have, Music and poesy use to quicken you; The mathematics and the metaphysics— Fall to them as you find your stomach serves you. No profit grows where is no pleasure ta'en.","Pardon me, gentle master. As usual, I’m in complete agreement with you about everything, and glad that you still relish the idea of studying philosophy—and let me add that I admire your virtue and your moral discipline. That said, let’s not become total stoics Stoics were ancient Greek philosophers who advocated indifference to pain or pleasure. stoics or unfeeling blocks of wood and give up all thought of pleasure. We don’t want to become so focused on Aristotle Aristotle’s writings would have beencentral to the university curriculum. In contrast, the poet Ovid wrote frequently about erotic love, and much of his work was considered scandalous. Aristotle that we forget to read Ovid. Here’s my thought: practice your logic as you chat with your friends, and your rhetoric in ordinary conversation. Use music and poetry to excite your senses. Math and metaphysics—well, I’d play them by ear, spending only as much time on them as you can stand. There’s nothing to be gained from things we take no pleasure in. What I’m saying, sir, is this: study what you most enjoy."
"Gramercies, Tranio, well dost thou advise. If, Biondello, thou wert come ashore, We could at once put us in readiness And take a lodging fit to entertain But stay awhile. What company is this?","Thanks, Tranio. That’s good advice. Now if only Biondello would get here, we could find a nice place to stay where the friends we’ll make here in Padua could visit us. Wait! Who are all these people?"
"Master, some show to welcome us to town.","Maybe it’s a parade to welcome us to town, master."
"Gentlemen, importune me no farther, For how I firmly am resolved you know— Before I have a husband for the elder. If either of you both love Katherina, Because I know you well and love you well Leave shall you have to court her at your pleasure.","Enough, gentlemen! You can’t influence me on this point. You know how I feel. I’m determined not to permit my younger daughter to marry until I have a husband for the elder one. I’ve long regarded you both as good friends. Therefore, if either of you is partial to Katherina, he shall have my permission to court her freely."
"There, there, Hortensio, will you any wife?","Cart Gremio refers to an Elizabethan practice in which prostitutes and women who “scolds” were tied behind a cart and whipped as it moved through town. Cart her, you mean. She’s too much for me. How about you, Hortensio? Are you still interested in marrying?"
"(to BAPTISTA) I pray you, sir, is it your will To make a stale of me amongst these mates?","(to BAPTISTA) May I ask, sir, if it’s your intention to publicly humiliate me, showing me off like a whore in front of these suitors?"
"“Mates,” maid? how mean you that? No mates for you","We’re not your suitors, that’s for sure! Not until you improve your temper, girl!"
"I' faith, sir, you shall never need to fear. I wis it is not halfway to her heart. But if it were, doubt not her care should be To comb your noddle with a three-legged stool","Don’t worry, I couldn’t care less. The only possible interest I could take in you would be to hit you on the head with a stool, paint your face with blood, and make a fool out of you."
"From all such devils, good Lord, deliver us!",May the good Lord keep me safe from all women like her!
"And me too, good Lord!","Me too, Lord!"
"(aside to LUCENTIO) Husht, master, here’s some good pastime toward.",(speaking so that only LUCENTIO can hear) Wow! This’ll be fun to watch! This girl is either completely crazy or incredibly willful.
"(aside to TRANIO) But in the other’s silence do I see Maid’s mild behavior and sobriety. Peace, Tranio.","(speaking so that only TRANIO can hear) But her sister seems quiet and well behaved, as a young girl should be. Shhh, Tranio."
"(aside to LUCENTIO) Well said, master. Mum, and gaze your fill.","(speaking so that only LUCENTIO can hear) Indeed, master. Let’s keep quiet and watch."
"Gentlemen, that I may soon make good What I have said—Bianca, get you in, And let it not displease thee, good Bianca, For I will love thee ne'er the less, my girl.","(to GREMIO and HORTENSIO) Gentlemen, since I’d like to make good on what I’ve said—Bianca, go inside. And don’t be unhappy, my dear. Whatever happens, you know I’ll never love you less."
"Put finger in the eye, an she knew why.","What a spoiled little brat. She’d make herself cry now, if she could think of a reason."
"Sister, content you in my discontent.— Sir, to your pleasure humbly I subscribe. My books and instruments shall be my company,","Sister, be happy in my unhappiness.—Sir, I will humbly obey you. I’ll take comfort in my books and music, reading and practicing my instruments."
"Hark, Tranio! Thou may’st hear Minerva speak.","Listen Tranio! That’s Minerva’s Minerva was the Roman goddess of wisdom. (In Greek mythology, she is called Athena.) Minerva’s voice you hear. "
"Signior Baptista, will you be so strange? Sorry am I that our goodwill effects Bianca’s grief.","Signior Baptista, will you really be this cruel? I regret that our goodwill should cause Bianca unhappiness."
"Signior Baptista, for this fiend of hell And make her bear the penance of her tongue?","Why are you locking her away because of this fiend from hell, Signor Baptista? Why does the one daughter have to be punished for the other’s mouth?"
"Gentlemen, content ye. I am resolved.— Go in, Bianca.","Gentlemen, I’ve made my decision. That’s all there is to it. Go inside, Bianca."
"In music, instruments, and poetry, Schoolmasters will I keep within my house, Fit to instruct her youth. If you, Hortensio, Or, Signior Gremio, you know any such, I will be very kind, and liberal To mine own children in good bringing up. And so farewell.—Katherina, you may stay, For I have more to commune with Bianca.","And because I know how fond she is of music, playing her instruments, and poetry, I plan to hire live-in tutors for her. If either of you gentlemen knows anyone who would be suitable for the job, send him to me. I’ll pay well for good teachers. I don’t stint when it comes to educating my children. Goodbye, gentlemen. Katherina, you may stay. I have things to discuss with Bianca."
"Why, and I trust I may go too, may I not? What, shall I be appointed hours as though, belike, I knew not what to take and what to leave, ha?","Stay out here? I don’t think so! Am I to be dictated to, like a child? Told when to come and where to go? No."
"You may go to the devil’s dam! Your gifts are so good here’s none will hold you.—Their love is not so great, Hortensio, but we may blow our nails together and fast it fairly out. Our cake’s dough on both sides. Farewell. Yet for the love I bear my sweet Bianca, if I can by any means light on a fit man to teach her that wherein she delights, I will wish him to her father.","You can go straight to hell! What you have to offer is nothing anyone wants. Hortensio, our desire to be married isn’t so great that we can’t wait this out patiently. It’s tough on both of us, but I guess we’ll live. So long. But to prove my love for Bianca, I’m going to see if I can find a good tutor to give her lessons in the things she enjoys. If I do, I’ll send him to her father."
"So will I, Signior Gremio. But a word, I pray. Though the nature of our quarrel yet never brooked parle, know now upon advice, it toucheth us both, that we may yet again have access to our fair mistress and be happy rivals in Bianca’s love, to labor and effect one thing specially.","I’ll do the same. But wait—don’t go just yet, Signior Gremio. I know we’ve never exactly been allies, but it might be in both our interests, if you think about it, to put our heads together about one particular thing. That is, if we ever want to return to being rivals for Bianca’s love."
"What’s that, I pray?",And that would be—?
"Marry, sir, to get a husband for her sister.",To find a husband for her sister.
A husband? A devil!,A husband? You mean a devil!
I say a husband.,I mean a husband.
"I say a devil. Think’st thou, Hortensio, though her father be very rich, any man is so very a fool to be married to hell?",I say a devil. Do you really think there’s a man fool enough to marry into hell—however rich the father is?
"Tush, Gremio. Though it pass your patience and mine to endure her loud alarums, why, man, there be good fellows in the world, an a man could light on them, would take her with all faults, and money enough.","Oh, I don’t know. Just because we wouldn’t want to put up with her tantrums, that doesn’t mean there aren’t guys who would, if we could find them. Guys who’d take her with all her faults, provided there were enough money involved."
I cannot tell. But I had as lief take her dowry with this condition: to be whipped at the high cross every morning.,I don’t know. All I know is I’d rather endure a public whipping every morning than put up with her—even with a big dowry.
"Faith, as you say, there’s small choice in rotten apples. But come, since this bar in law makes us friends, it shall be so far forth friendly maintained till by helping Baptista’s eldest daughter to a husband we set his youngest free for a husband, and then have to ’t afresh. Sweet Bianca! Happy man be his dole! He that runs fastest gets the ring. How say you, Signior Gremio?","The two choices are about equal, it’s true. But come, since we must be friends in the face of this new obstacle, let’s work together to find a husband for Baptista’s elder daughter, and thus free his younger daughter to have a husband, too. Then we can go back to fighting with each other. Happy the man that claims you, sweet Bianca! And may the best man win. What do you say, Signior Gremio?"
"I am agreed, and would I had given him the best horse inv Padua to begin his wooing that would thoroughly woo her, wed her, and bed her, and rid the house of her! Come on.","Agreed. This imaginary suitor for Katherina—I’d buy him the best horse in Padua if he’d get here quickly, woo her, marry her, take her to bed, and rid the house of her. Let’s go."
"I pray, sir, tell me, is it possible That love should of a sudden take such hold?","Sir, is it possible that a person could fall in love so suddenly?"
"O Tranio, till I found it to be true, But see, while idly I stood looking on, I found the effect of love in idleness And now in plainness do confess to thee That art to me as secret and as dear Tranio, I burn, I pine, I perish, Tranio, If I achieve not this young modest girl. Counsel me, Tranio, for I know thou canst. Assist me, Tranio, for I know thou wilt.","Oh, Tranio, until it happened to me, I never would have thought it possible. But now I confess it openly to you, Tranio. You are to me what Anna, Dido’s In Virgil’s Aeneid, Dido queen of Carthage, confessed her secret passion for Aeneas to her sister, Anna. Dido’s sister, was to the Queen of Carthage. I confide in you. I tell you, Tranio, I’m on fire, in agony. I’ll die if I can’t have this modest young girl for my wife. Advise me, Tranio—I know you can. Help me, Tranio—I know you will. "
"Affection is not rated from the heart. If love have touched you, naught remains but so: Redime te captum quam queas minimo.","Master, this is no moment to lecture you. The heart won’t be reasoned with. If love has touched you, love has touched you—end of story. But, as the Roman Terence advises, now that you’re a captive, it’s time to buy back your freedom at the lowest possible cost."
"Gramercies, lad, go forward. This contents.","Yes, you’re right. Please go on. I feel better already, and I know there’s more good advice where that came from."
"Master, you looked so longly on the maid, Perhaps you marked not what’s the pith of all.","Master, you were so focused on the girl herself, I wonder if you missed the main point here."
"Oh yes, I saw sweet beauty in her face Such as the daughter of Agenor had, When with his knees he kissed the Cretan strand.","Oh no! I saw sweetness and beauty in her face of the kind that humbled great Jove Jove, or Zeus, king of the gods, fell in love with Europa, a mortal maiden, and changed himself into a bull, carrying a Europa across the sea to Crete, where he raped her. Jove . He saw it in Europa that time she brought him to his knees in Crete."
Saw you no more? Marked you not how her sister Began to scold and raise up such a storm That mortal ears might hardly endure the din?,That’s all you noticed? You missed the part where her sister began to scold her and made such a ruckus that human ears could hardly stand it? 
And with her breath she did perfume the air. Sacred and sweet was all I saw in her.,"Tranio, I saw her coral-pink lips move and perfume the air with her breath. I saw nothing in her except what is virtuous and lovely."
"(aside) Nay, then, ’tis time to stir him from his trance.— I pray, awake, sir! If you love the maid, Her eldest sister is so curst and shrewd That till the father rid his hands of her, Master, your love must live a maid at home, And therefore has he closely mewed her up,","(to the audience) I think it’s time to rouse him from his trance.—Wake up, sir! If you love the girl, it’s time to figure out how to win her. The way things stand, her older sister is so bitchy and difficult that the father can’t wait to get rid of her. But until he does, your sweetheart is grounded, locked up at home and not allowed any suitors."
"Ah, Tranio, what a cruel father’s he! But art thou not advised, he took some care To get her cunning schoolmasters to instruct her?","Oh, Tranio, what a cruel father he is. Still, did you notice how ready he was to hire good tutors for her?"
"Ay, marry, am I, sir; and now ’tis plotted!",I did—and now I’ve got it!
"I have it, Tranio!","Tranio, I think I’ve got it!"
"Master, for my hand, Both our inventions meet and jump in one.","I’ll bet we’re both thinking the same thing, master."
Tell me thine first.,Tell me your idea first.
You will be schoolmaster And undertake the teaching of the maid: That’s your device.,You will pretend to be a schoolmaster and offer to teach the girl. Is that your plan?
It is. May it be done?,It is. Do you think it would work?
"And be in Padua here Vincentio’s son, Keep house and ply his book, welcome his friends, Visit his countrymen and banquet them?","No, not a chance. You’re supposed to be here in Padua studying. So who would fill in for you—pretend to be Vincentio’s son, live in his house, pore over his books, welcome his friends, and wine and dine his fellow expatriates from Pisa?"
"Basta, content thee, for I have it full. Nor can we be distinguished by our faces For man or master. Then it follows thus: Thou shalt be master, Tranio, in my stead, Keep house and port and servants as I should. Some Neapolitan, or meaner man of Pisa. 'Tis hatched, and shall be so. Tranio, at once Uncase thee. Take my colored hat and cloak.","Enough! Don’t worry, I have it all figured out. No one has seen us yet, and no one knows what we look like—which of us is master and which servant. It’s obvious: You will be me, Tranio—live in my house, instruct the servants and do everything in my place just as I would. I, meanwhile, will impersonate some other made-up fellow—some guy from Florence or Naples, or some poor guy from Pisa. There! That’s a plan. Take off what you’re wearing and put on my hat and cloak."
"When Biondello comes, he waits on thee,","Here comes Biondello. Where have you been, boy?"
"Where have I been? Nay, how now, where are you? Master, has my fellow Tranio stolen your clothes? Or you stolen his? Or both? Pray, what’s the news?","Where have I been? Where are you? Has Tranio stolen your clothes, master? Or have you stolen his? Have you both stolen each other’s? Please, what’s going on?"
"Sirrah, come hither: ’tis no time to jest, And therefore frame your manners to the time. Your fellow Tranio here, to save my life, And I for my escape have put on his; For in a quarrel since I came ashore I killed a man and fear I was descried. Wait you on him, I charge you, as becomes, You understand me?","Come here, boy. It’s no time for jokes: sober up. Tranio and I have traded clothes to save my life. I killed a man in a fight since we came ashore, and I’m worried someone saw me. While I make my escape, I need you to wait on Tranio as though he were me. Understand?"
"Aye, sir. (aside) Ne'er a whit.","Of course, sir. (to the audience) Not a word."
And not a jot of “Tranio” in your mouth. Tranio is changed into Lucentio.,And you’re not to utter a syllable of Tranio’s name. “Tranio” is now “Lucentio.”
The better for him. Would I were so too.,Lucky for him. Wish I could say the same.
"That Lucentio indeed had Baptista’s youngest daughter. But, sirrah, not for my sake, but your master’s, I advise You use your manners discreetly in all kind of companies. When I am alone, why then I am Tranio;","I’d second your wish if it automatically meant that Lucentio could have Baptista’s youngest daughter. This is for your master’s sake, not mine. So watch your step when there are other people around. When we’re by ourselves you can call me “Tranio.” Everywhere else, address me as your master Lucentio."
"Tranio, let’s go. One thing more rests, that thyself execute, to make one among these wooers. If thou ask me why, sufficeth my reasons are both good and weighty.","Tranio, let’s go. One last thing, and this is up to you. You’ll have to woo Bianca like the rest. Don’t ask why. Just trust me—I know what I’m doing."
"My lord, you nod. You do not mind the play.","(to SLY) My lord, you’re falling asleep. You’re not paying attention to the play."
"Yes, by Saint Anne, do I. A good matter, surely. Comes there any more of it?","No, no. I am. Really. Very impressive. Is there any more, or is that it?"
"My lord, ’tis but begun.","(speaking as SLY's wife) My lord, we’ve only just got started."
"'Tis a very excellent piece of work, madam lady. Would ’twere done.","And what an excellent piece of work it is, too, madam lady! I wish it were over."
"Verona, for a while I take my leave, To see my friends in Padua, but of all My best belovèd and approvèd friend, Hortensio. And I trow this is his house.","Farewell, Verona! I’m off to visit my friends in Padua—particularly my best friend Hortensio. And I think this is his house. Here, you there, Grumio. Knock."
"Knock, sir? Whom should I knock? Is there any man has rebused your Worship?","Knock, sir? Whom should I knock? Has anyone offended your Worship?"
"Villain, I say, knock me here soundly.",Moron! I’m telling you to make a fist and pound.
"Knock you here, sir? Why, sir, what am I, sir, that I should knock you here, sir?","Really, sir, I hardly think it would be appropriate for me to pound Grumio acts as if Petruchio asked Grumio to hit him. pound you."
"Villain, I say, knock me at this gate","Moron, here we are at the gate. Now put your fists to work, or I’ll put mine to work on your head!"
"My master is grown quarrelsome. I should knock you first, And then I know after who comes by the worst.",My master is being difficult. If I do as he asks I think I know which one of us will be sorrier—and it’s not going to be him!
"Will it not be? Faith, sirrah, an you’ll not knock, I’ll ring it.","What are you standing there for! If you won’t knock, I’ll ring—and you’ll be singing along in falsetto!"
"Help, mistress, help! My master is mad.","(to the unseen mistress or master of the house) Help, mistress, help! My master has gone mad."
"Now knock when I bid you, sirrah villain.","Next time maybe you’ll knock when I tell you, punk kid!"
"How now, what’s the matter? My old friend Grumio and my good friend Petruchio? How do you all at Verona?","Say, what’s the trouble? If it isn’t my old friend Grumio—and my dear friend Petruchio! How’s everyone in Verona?"
"Signior Hortensio, come you to part the fray?","Hortensio, have you come to break up the fight? Con tutto il cuore ben trovato The Italian means, “With all my heart, I’m glad to see you.” Con tutto il cuore ben trovato , if I may say so."
"Alla nostra casa ben venuto, molto honorato signor mio Petruchio.—Rise, Grumio, rise. We will compound this quarrel.","Alla nostra casa ben venuto, molto honorato signor mio Petruchio! The Italian means, “you are welcome here, my most honerd Signior Petruchio!” Alla nostra casa ben venuto, molto honorato signor mio Petruchio! Get up, Grumio. We’ll settle this quarrel."
"Nay, ’tis no matter, sir, what he 'leges in Latin. If this be not a lawful case for me to leave his service—look you, sir: he bid me knock him and rap him soundly, sir. Well, was it fit for a servant to use his master so, being perhaps, for aught I see, two-and-thirty, a pip out? Whom, would to God, I had well knocked at first,","I don’t care what he told you in Latin. If this isn’t legal justification for me to leave his service, I don’t know what is. He tells me to knock him, pound him, and put my fists to work on him. Well, I ask you, was that any way for a servant to behave toward his master—especially when he’s clearly a bit crazy. I wish I had hit him. I think I’d feel a lot better."
"A senseless villain, good Hortensio. I bade the rascal knock upon your gate And could not get him for my heart to do it.","He’s a worthless dog, Hortensio. I told him to knock at your gate and for the life of me could not get him to do it."
"Knock at the gate? O heavens! Spake you not these words plain: “Sirrah, knock me here, rap me here, knock me well, and knock me soundly”? And come you now with “knocking at the gate”?","Knock at the gate? Oh, for Pete’s sake! Didn’t you clearly say “Knock,” “pound,” and “put your fists to work”? Now you say it was “Knock at the gate”?"
"Sirrah, begone or talk not, I advise you.","Grumio, either leave or shut up. I’m warning you."
"Petruchio, patience. I am Grumio’s pledge. Why, this' a heavy chance ’twixt him and you, Your ancient, trusty, pleasant servant Grumio. And tell me now, sweet friend, what happy gale","Easy, Petruchio. I’ll vouch for Grumio. It’s terrible—you two fighting! Faithful, funny old Grumio! You guys go way back! Now, my dear friend, what lucky wind blows you in from Verona?"
"Such wind as scatters young men through the world To seek their fortunes farther than at home, Where small experience grows. But in a few, Signior Hortensio, thus it stands with me: And I have thrust myself into this maze, Happily to wive and thrive as best I may. Crowns in my purse I have and goods at home, And so am come abroad to see the world.","The wind that scatters young men throughout the world, encouraging them to seek their fortunes some place other than home, where there’s little to be found in the way of experience. But to be brief, Hortensio, the situation is that my father, Antonio, is dead, and I have set off into this crazy world to see if I can marry well and make a good life for myself. I have money in my purse and property at home, so I’m off to see the world."
"And wish thee to a shrewd, ill-favored wife? Thou’dst thank me but a little for my counsel; And yet I’ll promise thee she shall be rich, And very rich. But thou'rt too much my friend,","Petruchio, shall I be frank? I know where you can find a shrewish and unpleasant wife. I doubt you’d thank me in the end, but she’s rich, all right, very rich. But you’re too good a friend for me to wish her on you."
"Signior Hortensio, ’twixt such friends as we Few words suffice. And therefore, if thou know One rich enough to be Petruchio’s wife, As wealth is burden of my wooing dance, As old as Sibyl and as curst and shrewd As Socrates' Xanthippe, or a worse, She moves me not, or not removes at least Affection’s edge in me, were she as rough I come to wive it wealthily in Padua; If wealthily, then happily in Padua.","Hortensio, good friends like us can get by on a few words. If you can find a woman rich enough for me—because money is all I look for in a wife—let her be as ugly as Flotentius’s Flotentius was a knight in a medieval poem by Join Gower; he was forced to marry an extremely ugly woman. The Cumaean Sibyl was a mythical prophetess who lived forever. Xanthippe was Socrates notoriously bad-tempered wife. Flotentius’s love, as old as the Sibyl, and as bad-tempered as Xanthippe. It wouldn’t matter one way or the other. I’ve come here in search of a rich wife. If I find a rich wife in Padua, I’ll have found a good wife in Padua. "
"(to HORTENSIO) Nay, look you, sir, he tells you flatly what his mind is. Why, give him gold enough and marry him to a puppet or an aglet-baby, or an old trot with ne'er a tooth in her head, though she have as many diseases as two-and-fifty horses. Why, nothing comes amiss, so money comes withal.","(to HORTENSIO) He’s certainly frank, isn’t he, sir? Give him enough money and he’ll be happy with a puppet, a paper doll, or a diseased old hag without a tooth in her head. If she’s got money, what does it matter?"
"Petruchio, since we are stepped thus far in, I can, Petruchio, help thee to a wife With wealth enough, and young and beauteous, Brought up as best becomes a gentlewoman. Her only fault, and that is faults enough, And shrewd and froward, so beyond all measure That, were my state far worser than it is, I would not wed her for a mine of gold.","Petruchio, since the conversation’s gone this far, I may as well carry on with what I mentioned purely as a joke. I can help you find a wife who’s rich, young, beautiful, and reared in a manner fit for a gentlewoman. Her only flaw—and it’s a big one—is that she’s unbearable, a total witch, so much so that I wouldn’t think of marrying her myself, not even if I were in a worse fix than I am, not for a whole goldmine."
"Hortensio, peace. Thou know’st not gold’s effect. For I will board her, though she chide as loud As thunder when the clouds in autumn crack.","Hush, Hortensio. You don’t know what money can buy. Tell me her father’s name—that’s all I need. I will go after her even if her scolding is as deafening as thunder in an autumn rainstorm."
"Her father is Baptista Minola, An affable and courteous gentleman. Renowned in Padua for her scolding tongue.","Her father is Baptista Minola, a pleasant and courteous gentleman. Her name is Katherina Minola, famous throughout Padua for her scolding tongue."
"I know her father, though I know not her, And he knew my deceasèd father well. I will not sleep, Hortensio, till I see her, To give you over at this first encounter, Unless you will accompany me thither.","I don’t know her, but I know her father and he knew mine well. I won’t sleep until I see her, Hortensio. So I hope you’ll forgive my cutting short this first conversation of ours—unless you want to come with me."
"(to HORTENSIO) I pray you, sir, let him go while the humor lasts. O' my word, an she knew him as well as I do, she would think scolding would do little good upon him. She may perhaps call him half a score knaves or so. Why, that’s nothing; an he begin once, he’ll rail in his rope tricks. I’ll tell you what sir: an she stand him but a little, he will throw a figure in her face and so disfigure her with it that she shall have no more eyes to see withal than a cat. You know him not, sir.","(to HORTENSIO) Please, sir, let him go while he’s in this mood. Lord! If she knew him as well as I do, she’d realize how little effect a scolding has on him. At best she may come up with nine or ten abusive things to call him. That’s nothing. Once he starts on her, he’ll rant and rave on an epic scale. In fact, if she even tries to face him down, he’ll throw out a figure of speech that so disfigures her she’ll have no more eyes to see with than a cat. You don’t know him, sir."
"Tarry, Petruchio, I must go with thee, He hath the jewel of my life in hold, His youngest daughter, beautiful Bianca, And her withholds from me and other more, Suitors to her and rivals in my love, For those defects I have before rehearsed, That ever Katherina will be wooed. Therefore this order hath Baptista ta'en, That none shall have access unto Bianca","Wait, Petruchio, I should go with you. My own “wealth” is in Baptista’s keeping. His youngest daughter, the beautiful Bianca, is the jewel of my life, and he keeps her hidden away from me and other rivals for her hand. Because he finds it so incredible—owing to those character deficiencies I mentioned before—that any man will ever come courting Katherina, Baptista has therefore issued this edict: that none shall be permitted to court Bianca until that Katherine the shrew finds a husband."
“Katherine the curst!” A title for a maid of all titles the worst.,“Katherine the shrew!” That’s the worst thing you can call a young woman.
"Now shall my friend Petruchio do me grace, And offer me disguised in sober robes Well seen in music, to instruct Bianca, That so I may, by this device at least, Have leave and leisure to make love to her And, unsuspected, court her by herself.","Now my friend Petruchio will help me out, presenting me to old Baptista as a schoolmaster for Bianca well-versed in music. I’ll disguise myself in somber robes. In this costume, I’ll be able to spend time with her alone, which will give me plenty of opportunity to court her."
"Here’s no knavery! See, to beguile the old folks, how the young folks lay their heads together!","Oh, very nice! See how the young folks conspire to fool the old folks!"
"Master, master, look about you. Who goes there, ha?","Master, master, look! Who are these people?"
"Peace, Grumio. It is the rival of my love. Petruchio, stand by a while.","Hush, Grumio. It is my rival for Bianca. Petruchio, let’s stand over here awhile."
"(aside) A proper stripling, and an amorous.","(to the audience, indicating old GREMIO) Check out this stud! What a heartthrob!"
"Hark you, sir: I’ll have them very fairly bound, All books of love. See that at any hand, And see you read no other lectures to her. You understand me. Over and beside I’ll mend it with a largess. Take your paper too. And let me have them very well perfum’d For she is sweeter than perfume itself To whom they go to. What will you read to her?","(to LUCENTIO) Oh, all right, I’ve reviewed the list of books. But listen: I want them very handsomely bound—only books of love, make sure of that in any case. And see that you give her no other lessons. Do I make myself clear? Over and above what Signior Baptista pays you, I’ll tack on a bonus. Take these notes, too. And make sure they’re pleasantly perfumed. The lady they are meant for is sweeter than perfume itself. What are you planning to read her?"
"As for my patron, stand you so assured, As firmly as yourself were still in place, Yea, and perhaps with more successful words Than you, unless you were a scholar, sir.","(speaking as CAMBIO) Whatever I read her, you can be sure that I’ll plead the case for your love as strongly as if you yourself stood there before her—and perhaps even a bit more successfully than you would do, sir, seeing as you’re not a scholar."
"O this learning, what a thing it is!","Oh, what an excellent thing this learning is!"
"(aside) O this woodcock, what an ass it is!","(speaking to the audience) Oh, what an asinine thing this moron is!"
"(aside) Peace, sirrah!","(speaking so that only GRUMIO can hear) Silence, boy!"
"(aside) Grumio, mum! God save you, Signior Gremio.","(speaking so that only GRUMIO can hear) Grumio, hush! (to GREMIO, who can’t hear him) God save you, Signior Gremio."
"And you are well met, Signior Hortensio. I promised to enquire carefully About a schoolmaster for the fair Bianca, And by good fortune I have lighted well On this young man, for learning and behavior And other books—good ones, I warrant ye.","Good to see you, Signior Hortensio. Do you know where I’m going? To Baptista Minola’s house. I promised to look into schoolmasters for Miss Bianca, and luck has led me to this young man, perfectly suited in learning and fine manners, well read in poetry and other books—all of them good, I assure you."
"'Tis well. And I have met a gentleman Hath promised me to help me to another, A fine musician to instruct our mistress. To fair Bianca, so beloved of me.",That’s great. And I have met a gentleman who promises to help me find a good music tutor to instruct our lady love. I wouldn’t want to fall behind in my devotion to my beloved Bianca.
"Beloved of me, and that my deeds shall prove.",My beloved—as my actions will prove.
(aside) And that his bags shall prove.,(speaking to the audience) As his moneybags will prove.
"Gremio, ’tis now no time to vent our love. I’ll tell you news indifferent good for either.","Gremio, this is no time to compete over how deeply we love Bianca. Be nice and listen to me a moment, and I’ll give you a piece of news that’s equally good for both of us."
"(presenting PETRUCHIO) Here is a gentleman whom by chance I met, Upon agreement from us to his liking, Yea, and to marry her, if her dowry please.","(presenting PETRUCHIO) Here is a gentleman I happened to meet who, if we can come to an arrangement that would be to his liking, is willing to undertake to woo fierce Katherine—yes, even willing to marry her, if the price is right."
"So said, so done, is well. Hortensio, have you told him all her faults?","That’s good, if he’ll really do it. Have you told him all her faults, Hortensio?"
I know she is an irksome brawling scold.,"I know she is a hateful, brawling scold. If that’s all, gentlemen, I see no problem."
"No? Say’st me so, friend? What countryman?","No? Tell me, friend. Where are you from?"
"Born in Verona, old Antonio’s son. My father dead, my fortune lives for me. And I do hope good days and long to see.","Born in Verona. I’m old Antonio’s son. My father’s dead, and his fortune is mine now. I hope to see good days—and many of them."
"But if you have a stomach, to ’t, i' God’s name: You shall have me assisting you in all. But will you woo this wildcat?","Sir, such a life with such a wife is unlikely! But if you have the stomach for it, you’ll have all the help from me you need. Do you really mean to go after this wildcat?"
Will I live?,Do I mean to go on breathing?
"Will he woo her? Ay, or I’ll hang her.",He’ll woo her or I’ll hang her.
"Think you a little din can daunt mine ears? Have I not in my time heard lions roar? Have I not heard the sea, puffed up with winds, Rage like an angry boar chafèd with sweat? And heaven’s artillery thunder in the skies?","Why did I come here if not for that? Do you think a little burst of noise can intimidate me—I, who have heard lions roar? I, who have survived storms at sea where the winds raged like wild animals? I, who have heard the rumble of guns in battle—and thunder in the sky (heaven’s version of artillery)."
"Have I not in a pitchèd battle heard Loud 'larums, neighing steeds, and trumpets' clang? And do you tell me of a woman’s tongue As will a chestnut in a farmer’s fire? Tush, tush! Fear boys with bugs.","Have I not stood in the middle of a battle, with loud calls to arms, horses neighing, and trumpets sounding all around me? And you worry how I’ll react to a woman’s tongue, which isn’t even as loud as the pop! of a chestnut roasting in some farmer’s oven? Please. Scare children with your bugaboos."
For he fears none.,Because he’s not afraid of them.
"Hortensio, hark. My mind presumes, for his own good and ours.","Listen, Hortensio. I think this gentleman’s arrival could be most fortunate—both for himself and for us."
"I promised we would be contributors And bear his charge of wooing, whatsoe'er.","I promised him that we would all chip in and take care of the wooing expenses, whatever they come to."
"And so we will, provided that he win her.",Absolutely—so long as he gets the girl.
I would I were as sure of a good dinner.,I wish I could be as certain of a good dinner.
"(as LUCENTIO) Gentlemen, God save you. If I may be bold, Tell me, I beseech you, which is the readiest way To the house of Signior Baptista Minola?","(speaking as LUCENTIO) Greetings, gentlemen. May I be so bold as to ask the fastest way to Signior Baptista Minola’s house?"
He that has the two fair daughters—is ’t he you mean?,The old man with the two pretty daughters? Is that the man you want?
"(as LUCENTIO) Even he, Biondello.","(speaking as LUCENTIO) The very one, Biondello."
"Hark you, sir, you mean not her to—","Pardon, sir, I hope you’re not looking for the daughter—"
"(as LUCENTIO) Perhaps him and her, sir. What have you to do?",(speaking as LUCENTIO) I might be looking for both the daughter and her father. What’s it to you?
"Not her that chides, sir, at any hand, I pray.","But not the woman who scolds, anyway, I hope."
"(as LUCENTIO) I love no chiders, sir. Biondello, let’s away.","(speaking as LUCENTIO) I’m not a fan of scolds, my friend. Come, Biondello."
"(aside) Well begun, Tranio.","(speaking quietly) Nice work, Tranio!"
"Sir, a word ere you go. Are you a suitor to the maid you talk of, yea or no?","Sir, a word before you go. Are you a suitor to the girl we speak of, yes or no?"
"An if I be, sir, is it any offense?",What if I am? Is there a problem?
"No, if without more words you will get you hence.","Not if you go away, there isn’t."
"(as LUCENTIO) Why, sir, I pray, are not the streets as free For me as for you?","(speaking as LUCENTIO) Well, it seems to me that the streets are as much mine as yours."
But so is not she.,But she isn’t.
"For what reason, I beseech you?","And why is that, please?"
"For this reason, if you’ll know: That she’s the choice love of Signior Gremio.","Because, if you must know, she’s been chosen by Signior Gremio."
That she’s the chosen of Signior Hortensio.,Because she’s been chosen by Signior Hortensio.
"Do me this right: hear me with patience. Baptista is a noble gentleman, To whom my father is not all unknown, And were his daughter fairer than she is,","Wait a minute, gentlemen. Be good enough to hear me out. Baptista is a noble gentleman—one to whom my father is not completely unknown—and lovely as his daughter is, she is entitled to any number of suitors—myself among them."
"Fair Leda’s daughter had a thousand wooers; Then well one more may fair Bianca have. And so she shall. Lucentio shall make one, Though Paris Paris was the Trojan prince who stole Helen from her Greek husband, starting the Trojan War. Paris came in hope to speed alone.","The beautiful Helen of Troy had a thousand suitors. Let Bianca have one more—anyway, she’s got one. Lucentio shall join the ranks, even if Paris himself comes to woo her."
What! This gentleman will out-talk us all.,This fellow will out-talk us all.
"(as CAMBIO) Sir, give him head; I know he’ll prove a jade.","(speaking as CAMBIO) Well, let him. He’ll talk himself out, soon."
"Hortensio, to what end are all these words?","Hortensio, what’s all this about?"
"(to TRANIO) Sir, let me be so bold as ask you, Did you yet ever see Baptista’s daughter?","(to TRANIO) Forgive me for asking, but have you ever actually seen Baptista’s daughter?"
The one as famous for a scolding tongue As is the other for beauteous modesty.,"(speaking as LUCENTIO) No, but I hear he has two, the one as famous for her scolding tongue as the other is for her modesty and beauty."
"Sir, sir, the first’s for me; let her go by.","The first one’s mine, so hands off!"
"Yea, leave that labor to great Hercules,","Yes, leave that labor to great Hercules—it’s worse than the previous twelve put together."
"(to TRANIO) Sir, understand you this of me, in sooth: The youngest daughter, whom you hearken for, Her father keeps from all access of suitors And will not promise her to any man The younger then is free, and not before.","(to TRANIO) Sir, let me be clear. As far as the youngest daughter, the one you were asking about, is concerned, the father refuses any suitors access to her. He will not promise her to any man until the elder sister is married. Then and only then will the younger be free to marry."
"(as LUCENTIO) If it be so, sir, that you are the man Must stead us all, and me amongst the rest, And if you break the ice and do this feat, For our access, whose hap shall be to have her Will not so graceless be to be ingrate.","(as LUCENTIO) If that’s the case, then you’re the man to help us, me along with the rest. And if you carry it off and break the ice—win the older and make the younger accessible to us—whoever winds up with her will not be such a boor as to be ungrateful, I’m sure."
"Sir, you say well, and well you do conceive. And since you do profess to be a suitor, To whom we all rest generally beholding.","Sir, that’s well said and well thought out. Now, since you count yourself among Bianca’s suitors, you must—as we already have—pay this gentlemen to whom we are all so indebted."
"(as LUCENTIO) Sir, I shall not be slack; in sign whereof, Please ye we may contrive this afternoon And quaff carouses to our mistress' health Strive mightily, but eat and drink as friends.","(speaking as LUCENTIO) I’ll ante up, certainly! And on that note, let’s all pass the time this afternoon drinking rounds to our mistress’s health and following the example of legal adversaries, who fight tooth and nail in court but eat and drink as friends."
"O excellent motion! Fellows, let’s be gone.",An excellent motion. Let’s go.
"The motion’s good indeed and be it so.— Petruchio, I shall be your ben venuto.","I second that motion A motion is a legal maneuver in court. motion . So be it. Petruchio, I’m buying."
"Good sister, wrong me not nor wrong yourself, To make a bondmaid and a slave of me. That I disdain. But for these other goods— Unbind my hands, I’ll pull them off myself, Or what you will command me will I do, So well I know my duty to my elders.","Dear sister, it’s unfair to me—and unfair to yourself—to turn me into a slave. That I won’t stand for. But if you want my things—untie my hands and I’ll give them to you myself, everything, even down to my slip. Or anything else you order me to do. I know I should obey my elders."
Of all thy suitors here I charge thee tell Whom thou lovest best. See thou dissemble not.,What I want is for you to tell me which of your suitors you like best. And don’t lie.
I never yet beheld that special face Which I could fancy more than any other.,"I swear, dear sister, I have not yet encountered that special face I might prefer to any other."
"Minion, thou liest. Is ’t not Hortensio?","You lying brat. It’s Hortensio, isn’t it?"
"If you affect him, sister, here I swear","If you want him, dear sister, he’s yours. I swear I’ll woo him for you myself."
"Oh, then belike you fancy riches more. You will have Gremio to keep you fair.","Oh, I see. You’re more interested in money. You’ll live in luxury with Gremio."
"Is it for him you do envy me so? Nay, then you jest, and now I well perceive I prithee, sister Kate, untie my hands.","Is it because of him that you envy me? You must be kidding! And now I see that you’ve been joking all the while. Please, Kate, untie my hands."
"If that be jest, then all the rest was so.","If that’s a joke, I guess the rest was, too."
"Why, how now, dame! whence grows this insolence?— Bianca, stand aside.—Poor girl, she weeps! (to KATHERINE) For shame, thou hilding of a devilish spirit! Why dost thou wrong her that did ne'er wrong thee? When did she cross thee with a bitter word?","What in the world is going on! (to KATHERINE) Young lady, where do you get the nerve!—(to BIANCA) Get behind me, Bianca.—Poor girl, she’s hysterical!—Go do some sewing. Don’t even talk to her. (to KATHERINE) You monstrous, good-for-nothing fiend! Why would you want to hurt your sister? She never did you any harm! When has she spoken even one cross word to you?"
"Her silence flouts me, and I’ll be revenged.","She mocks me with her silence, and I’ll get my revenge on her."
"What, in my sight?—Bianca, get thee in.","What, in my presence? How dare you!—Bianca, go inside."
"What, will you not suffer me? Nay, now I see She is your treasure, she must have a husband, I must dance barefoot on her wedding day And, for your love to her, lead apes in hell. Till I can find occasion of revenge.",You mean you don’t even want to hear my side? Of course! She’s your treasure. She must have a husband and I must dance barefoot on her wedding day. You like her best and so I’ll die an old maid. Don’t talk to me. I’ll just go cry myself sick and think of some way to get back at all of you.
Was ever gentleman thus grieved as I? But who comes here?,Has any man ever had to put up with what I do? Now what?
"Good morrow, neighbor Baptista.","Good morning, neighbor Baptista."
"Good morrow, neighbor Gremio.—God save you, gentlemen!","Good morning, neighbor Gremio. Greetings, gentlemen."
"And you, good sir. Pray, have you not a daughter Called Katherina, fair and virtuous?","And to you, good sir. Tell me, don’t you have a virtuous and lovely daughter named Katherina?"
"I have a daughter, sir, called Katherina.","I have a daughter named Katherina, sir."
(to PETRUCHIO) You are too blunt. Go to it orderly.,(to PETRUCHIO) You are too blunt. You’re supposed to work up to it.
"You wrong me, Signior Gremio. Give me leave.— I am a gentleman of Verona, sir, That hearing of her beauty and her wit, Her affability and bashful modesty, Am bold to show myself a forward guest Within your house, to make mine eye the witness Of that report which I so oft have heard. And, for an entrance to my entertainment, (presenting HORTENSIO, disguised as LITIO) Cunning in music and the mathematics, To instruct her fully in those sciences, Whereof I know she is not ignorant. His name is Litio, born in Mantua.","Please, Signior Gremio. Allow me to continue.—I am a gentleman of Verona, sir, who, hearing of your daughter’s beauty and wit, her friendly disposition and bashful modesty, her uncommon virtues and her mild behavior, have taken the liberty of presenting myself as a guest at your house in the hope of seeing for myself if what I’ve heard is true. And, as the price of admission for being received by you, I here present you with a servant of mine. (he presents HORTENSIO, disguised as LITIO). He is expert in the fields of music and mathematics. I thought he might instruct her in those branches of knowledge—of which she is, I gather, no beginner. Be good enough to accept this gift—I’ll be offended if you don’t. His name is Litio, and he comes from Mantua."
"You’re welcome, sir, and he for your good sake. But for my daughter Katherine, this I know, She is not for your turn, the more my grief.","You and he are both welcome, sir. As for my daughter Katherine, this much I know: she’s not for you—more’s the pity."
Or else you like not of my company.,I see you don’t intend to part with her—or perhaps you don’t like my company.
"Mistake me not. I speak but as I find. Whence are you, sir? What may I call your name?","Don’t misunderstand me, sir. I’m just stating the facts as I see them. Where are you from? What’s your name?"
"Petruchio is my name, Antonio’s son,","My name is Petruchio, son of Antonio, a man well known throughout Italy."
I know him well. You are welcome for his sake.,I know him well. You are welcome for his sake.
"Saving your tale, Petruchio, I pray Let us that are poor petitioners speak too. Bacare, you are marvelous forward.","With all due respect, Petruchio, give someone else a chance to speak. You’re so aggressive!"
"Oh, pardon me, Signior Gremio, I would fain be doing.","Forgive me, Signior Gremio, but I’m anxious to get things moving."
"I doubt it not, sir, but you will curse your wooing.— Neighbor, this is a gift very grateful, I am sure of it. To express the like kindness, myself, that have been more kindly beholding to you than any, freely give unto you this young scholar (presenting LUCENTIO, disguised as CAMBIO) that hath been long studying at Rheims, as cunning in Greek, Latin, and other languages as the other in music and mathematics. His name is Cambio. Pray accept his service.","No doubt, but you may be going about it the wrong way—Neighbor, this gift is very gracious, I’m sure. I myself, who am more indebted to you than anyone, have brought you this young scholar (presenting LUCENTIO, disguised as CAMBIO) who has long studied at Rheims Rheims was the site of a renowned university in France. Rheims . He is as expert in Greek, Latin, and other languages as that other man is in music and mathematics. His name is Cambio. Please accept his services."
"A thousand thanks, Signior Gremio. Welcome, good Cambio. (to TRANIO as LUCENTIO) But, gentle sir, methinks you walk like a stranger. May I be so bold to know the cause of your coming?","Many thanks, Signior Gremio. Welcome, good Cambio. (to TRANIO as LUCENTIO) As for you, sir, you would appear to be a stranger. May I be so bold as to ask your reason for coming?"
"(as LUCENTIO) Pardon me, sir, the boldness is mine own, Do make myself a suitor to your daughter, Unto Bianca, fair and virtuous. Nor is your firm resolve unknown to me, In the preferment of the eldest sister. That, upon knowledge of my parentage, I may have welcome ’mongst the rest that woo And free access and favor as the rest. And toward the education of your daughters, And this small packet of Greek and Latin books. BIONDELLO brings the gifts forward If you accept them, then their worth is great.","(as LUCENTIO) Pardon me, sir, the boldness is all mine in seeking to court your fair and virtuous daughter, Bianca. I am indeed a stranger in this city. I’m aware of your firm decision regarding her older sister. I only ask that when you know who my parents are, I may be made as welcome as her other suitors and given the same freedom and favor. My contribution toward the education of your daughters is a lute and this small package of Greek and Latin books. (BIONDELLO brings the gifts forward) You would add to their value by accepting them."
"Lucentio is your name. Of whence, I pray?","Your name is Lucentio, you say. Of what city, may I ask?"
"(as LUCENTIO) Of Pisa, sir, son to Vincentio.","(as LUCENTIO) Of Pisa, sir, son of Vincentio."
"A mighty man of Pisa. By report I know him well. You are very welcome, sir. (to HORTENSIO as LITIO) Take you the lute, (to LUCENTIO as CAMBIO) and you the set of books. Holla, within!","A man of great influence. I know him well by reputation. You are very welcome here, sir. (to HORTENSIO as LITIO) You take the lute (to LUCENTIO as CAMBIO), and you, the set of books. I’ll send you to your pupils right away. You there in the house!"
"Sirrah, lead these gentlemen To my daughters, and tell them both These are their tutors. Bid them use them well.","Boy, take these gentlemen to my daughters, and tell them both they are to be their teachers and to be courteous to them."
"We will go walk a little in the orchard, And so I pray you all to think yourselves.",Let’s take a little walk in the orchard before dinner. You are all most welcome here; please make yourselves at home.
"Signior Baptista, my business asketh haste, And every day I cannot come to woo. You knew my father well, and in him me, Which I have bettered rather than decreased. Then tell me, if I get your daughter’s love, What dowry shall I have with her to wife?","Signior Baptista, I’m actually in a bit of a hurry. I can’t make this wooing into a daily thing. You knew my father well; therefore, you know me, the sole heir to all his property and possessions, which I have added to rather than depleted. So, tell me, assuming I win your daughter’s love, what dowry would she bring to the marriage?"
"After my death, the one half of my lands,","Twenty thousand crowns now, and half my lands after my death."
"And, for that dowry, I’ll assure her of Her widowhood, be it that she survive me, In all my lands and leases whatsoever. Let specialties be therefore drawn between us,","Fair enough. And on my side, I’ll guarantee that if I die before she does, she shall inherit all my land and the rent from any property I own. Let’s have explicit contracts drawn up to ensure that both sides keep their promises."
"Ay, when the special thing is well obtained, That is, her love, for that is all in all.","Certainly, as soon as you’ve gotten the most important thing—her love. That counts for everything."
"Why, that is nothing. For I tell you, father, I am as peremptory as she proud-minded; They do consume the thing that feeds their fury. Though little fire grows great with little wind, Yet extreme gusts will blow out fire and all. So I to her and so she yields to me,","Oh, that’s nothing, believe me, sir. I’m as commanding as she is proud, and when two raging fires meet, they end up consuming the very thing that kindled them. Blow on a fire and all you do is fan the flames. But a great gust of wind will blow the fire out completely. I’m that great gust to her fire. I’m rough, and I don’t woo like a little boy."
"Well mayst thou woo, and happy be thy speed. But be thou armed for some unhappy words.","Well, good luck! I hope you’re successful. But prepare yourself for some unpleasantness."
"Ay, to the proof, as mountains are for winds, That shakes not, though they blow perpetually.","I’ll be completely prepared. Mountains don’t tremble, however much the wind may blow!"
"How now, my friend, why dost thou look so pale?","Gracious! Why so pale, my friend?"
"(as LITIO) For fear, I promise you, if I look pale.",(as LITIO) I would have to say from fear.
"What, will my daughter prove a good musician?","Will my daughter be a good musician, do you think?"
"I think she’ll sooner prove a soldier. Iron may hold with her, but never lutes.",I think she’ll be a better soldier. She may be good with firearms. Never lutes.
"Why, then thou canst not break her to the lute?",You don’t think you can teach her?
"Why, no, for she hath broke the lute to me. I did but tell her she mistook her frets, And bowed her hand to teach her fingering, When, with a most impatient devilish spirit, And with that word she struck me on the head, And through the instrument my pate made way,","No, but she’s taught me a thing or two! All I said was that she was using the wrong frets and tried to adjust her fingering. And she jumps up and says, “Frets? I’ll give you frets!” With that, she clobbers me with the lute so that my head goes right through,"
"And there I stood amazèd for a while As on a pillory, looking through the lute, And “twangling Jack”; with twenty such vile terms, As had she studied to misuse me so.","and there I am, dazed, strings around my neck, looking through the sound hole like I was in the stocks, while she calls me “worthless fiddler,” “twanging twerp,” and twenty more hateful names, as though she’d prepared for me by composing a long list of insults to use on my behalf."
"Now, by the world, it is a lusty wench. I love her ten times more than e'er I did.",I like this girl! She has real character! Now I want her more than ever. I can’t wait to meet her!
"(to HORTENSIO as LITIO) Well, go with me and be not so discomfited. Proceed in practice with my younger daughter. She’s apt to learn and thankful for good turns. Or shall I send my daughter Kate to you?","(to HORTENSIO, disguised as LITIO) All right, come with me. Don’t be discouraged. Continue your lessons with my younger daughter. She’s quick to learn and responsive. Signior Petruchio, will you come with us, or shall I send my daughter Kate to you?"
I pray you do.,Please do.
"I’ll attend her here And woo her with some spirit when she comes. Say that she rail; why then I’ll tell her plain Say that she frown; I’ll say she looks as clear As morning roses newly washed with dew. Say she be mute and will not speak a word; Then I’ll commend her volubility, If she do bid me pack, I’ll give her thanks, As though she bid me stay by her a week. If she deny to wed, I’ll crave the day When I shall ask the banns and when be marrièd.","I’ll wait for her here and when she comes I’ll take a novel approach with her. If she rants, I’ll tell her that she sings as sweetly as a nightingale. If she glares, I’ll say her brow is as clear as roses newly washed with morning dew. If she is silent and won’t speak at all, I’ll praise her chattiness and say she speaks with piercing eloquence. If she orders me to go, I’ll thank her warmly as if she’d just offered to put me up for a week. If she refuses my proposal, I’ll tell her how much I’m looking forward to the announcement and the wedding. But here she comes. Here goes!"
"Good morrow, Kate—for that’s your name, I hear.","Good morning, Kate, for I hear that’s what you’re called."
"Well have you heard, but something hard of hearing. They call me Katherine that do talk of me.",Is that what you’ve heard? Then you’d better get your ears checked. I am called Katherine by those who have any business using my name.
"You lie, in faith, for you are called plain Kate, But Kate, the prettiest Kate in Christendom, Kate of Kate Hall, my super-dainty Kate— For dainties are all Kates—and therefore, Kate, Take this of me, Kate of my consolation: Thy virtues spoke of, and thy beauty sounded— Yet not so deeply as to thee belongs— Myself am moved to woo thee for my wife.","Liar. In fact, you’re called Kate, plain Kate—and pretty Kate, and sometimes Kate the shrew. But it’s definitely Kate—the prettiest Kate in the world, Katie, Kitty, Kat-woman, the Kate-ster—and so, Kate, here’s my pitch: that having heard your charming disposition praised—not to mention your beauty and your virtues, though none of them as richly as you deserve—I find myself driven to propose. I want you for my wife."
"“Moved,” in good time. Let him that moved you hither You were a moveable.","“Driven?” Really? Well, let whoever drove you here drive you back again. I had you figured for a piece of furniture."
"Why, what’s a moveable?",What do you mean by “furniture”?
A joint stool.,A nice stool.
"Thou hast hit it. Come, sit on me.","You’re right, actually. Come sit on me."
"Asses are made to bear, and so are you.","Asses are made for bearing, and so are you."
"Women are made to bear, and so are you.","Women are made for bearing A double pun—“to bear,” here, means first “to bear weight” and second “to give birth to children.” bearing , and so are you."
"No such jade as you, if me you mean.",Not by the likes of you!
"Alas, good Kate, I will not burden thee, For knowing thee to be but young and light—","Oh heavens, Kate, I wouldn’t think of burdening you. I know how light In Shakespeare’ day, “light” could mean “loose”, as in “a loose woman” light and carefree you are."
"Too light for such a swain as you to catch, And yet as heavy as my weight should be.",Too light for a lout like you to catch—though no lighter than I should be.
“Should be”—should buzz!,Should be? Maybe you should be the subject of some buzz!
"Well ta'en, and like a buzzard.","Buzz off, buzzard Buzzard was another word for “fool” or “useless person” because a buzzard was a kind of hawk that was useless for falconry. buzzard ."
"O slow-winged turtle, shall a buzzard take thee?","If I’m a buzzard, you’re a turtledove The turtledove was a symbol of faithful love. turtledove ."
"Ay, for a turtle, as he takes a buzzard.",Only a buzzard would think so.
"Come, come, you wasp. I' faith, you are too angry.","Come, my little wasp—you’re too angry."
"If I be waspish, best beware my sting.","If I’m a wasp, look out for my stinger."
My remedy is then to pluck it out.,All I have to do is remove it.
"Ay, if the fool could find it where it lies.","True, if a fool such as yourself could find it."
Who knows not where a wasp does wear his sting? In his tail.,Everyone knows where a wasp wears its stinger. In its tail.
In his tongue.,"No, in its tongue."
Whose tongue?,Whose tongue?
"Yours, if you talk of tales. And so farewell.","Yours, if we’re talking about tales “Tales” here means “lies,” as in “telling tales,” and is a pun on “tail,” which, when Petruchio first mentions it, means “butt.” Their punning involves a lot of sexual innuendo. tales . I’m leaving."
"What, with my tongue in your tail? Nay, come again, Good Kate. I am a gentleman.","You’re leaving with my tongue in your tail? No, come back, Kate. I’m too much of a gentleman."
That I’ll try.,A gentleman? We’ll see about that!
I swear I’ll cuff you if you strike again.,I swear I’ll smack you if you hit me again.
"So may you lose your arms. And if no gentleman, why then no arms.","Not if you want to keep your arms! If you hit me, that proves you’re not a gentleman A noble family, like that of a “gentleman,” would have a “coat of arms.” gentleman . And if you’re not a gentleman, you don’t have any arms."
"A herald, Kate? Oh, put me in thy books!","Are you a herald A herald’s books officially registered gentlemen. herald , Kate? Put me in your books!"
What is your crest? A coxcomb?,What is your crest A crest is a symbol on a nobleman’s family coat of arms. crest ? A coxcomb A coxcomb was a dunce cap such as worn by fools and jesters. coxcomb ?
"A combless cock, so Kate will be my hen.","I’ll give up my comb Cock = rooster. The comb was the symbol of a rooster’s masculinity, so Petruchio is willing to be “unmanned” for her. comb , if you’ll be my hen."
No cock of mine. You crow too like a craven.,Your cock is not for me. It has no fighting spirit.
"Nay, come, Kate, come. You must not look so sour.","Oh, come on now, Kate. Don’t look so sour."
"It is my fashion, when I see a crab.","That’s my way, when I see a crab-apple."
"Why, here’s no crab, and therefore look not sour.","There’s no crab-apple here, so don’t look sour."
"There is, there is.",There is a crab-apple here.
Then show it me.,Show me.
"Had I a glass, I would.","I would, if I had a mirror."
"What, you mean my face?","What, you mean my face looks like a crab-apple?"
Well aimed of such a young one.,What a clever child he is!
"Now, by Saint George, I am too young for you.","You know, you’re right. I probably am too young for you."
Yet you are withered.,"Maybe, but you’re wrinkled all the same."
'Tis with cares.,"Oh, that’s with worry."
I care not.,"Well, that doesn’t worry me."
"Nay, hear you, Kate: in sooth you ’scape not so.","Listen, Kate! You won’t get away like that."
"I chafe you, if I tarry. Let me go.",Let me go. I’ll make you angry if I stay.
"No, not a whit. I find you passing gentle. 'Twas told me you were rough and coy and sullen, For thou are pleasant, gamesome, passing courteous, But slow in speech, yet sweet as springtime flowers. Thou canst not frown, thou canst not look askance, Nor bite the lip as angry wenches will, But thou with mildness entertain’st thy wooers, With gentle conference, soft and affable. Why does the world report that Kate doth limp?","No, not a bit. I find you quite gentle. I was told that you were violent, proud, and sullen. But now I see that people have been lying about you, for you are funny, playful, and beautifully behaved, not sharp-tongued, but as sweet as flowers in springtime. You haven’t got it in you to frown or look displeased or bite your lip as angry women do. You don’t take pleasure in bitter conversation. No, you entertain your suitors with mild and gentle conversation, quiet and pleasant. Why does the world report that Kate is lame?"
"O slanderous world! Kate like the hazel-twig As hazel nuts, and sweeter than the kernels. Oh, let me see thee walk! Thou dost not halt.","The world’s a liar. Kate is as straight and slender as a hazel-twig, her hair as brown as hazelnut shells, and she herself sweeter than the kernels. Take a few steps—I want to see you walk. You don’t limp at all!"
"Go, fool, and whom thou keep’st command.","Get out of here, fool, and give orders to your servants, not me."
"Did ever Dian so become a grove Oh, be thou Dian, and let her be Kate, And then let Kate be chaste and Dian sportful.","Did Diana ever beautify a grove as much as Kate beautifies this room with her queenly movements? You be Diana, and let Diana be Kate. Then let Kate be the chaste one, while Diana plays with me."
Where did you study all this goodly speech?,Where do you memorize all this smart talk?
"It is extempore, from my mother wit.",I make it up as I go. It’s born of my mother wit Mother wit = natural intelligence. mother wit .
A witty mother! Witless else her son.,A witty mother! Too bad about the son!
Am I not wise?,Am I not wise?
"Yes, keep you warm.",Enough to keep yourself warm. “Enough wit to keep yourself warm” was a proverbial expression for “stupid.” Enough to keep yourself warm.
"Marry, so I mean, sweet Katherine, in thy bed. And therefore, setting all this chat aside, Thus in plain terms: your father hath consented And, will you, nill you, I will marry you. Now, Kate, I am a husband for your turn, For, by this light, whereby I see thy beauty, Thy beauty that doth make me like thee well, For I am he am born to tame you, Kate, And bring you from a wild Kate to a Kate Conformable as other household Kates.","Yes, I intend to keep myself warm, sweet Katherine—in your bed. So let’s cut to the chase: your father has consented for you to become my wife. Your dowry is agreed upon, and whether you like it or not, I will marry you. I tell you, I’m the man for you, Kate. I swear by this light, which shows me your beauty—the beauty that makes me love you—that you must be married to no man but me. I’m the man who was born to tame you and change you from a wildcat Kate into a Kate as gentle and domestic as other household Kates."
Here comes your father. Never make denial.,Here comes your father. Don’t even think about refusing. I must and will have Katherine for my wife.
"Now, Signior Petruchio, how speed you with my daughter?","Now, Signior Petruchio, how are you getting on with my daughter?"
"How but well, sir? How but well? It were impossible I should speed amiss.","Beautifully, sir, beautifully! It couldn’t go any other way."
"Why, how now, daughter Katherine? In your dumps?","Now, daughter Katherine? Are you down in the dumps?"
"You have showed a tender fatherly regard To wish me wed to one half lunatic, A mad-cup ruffian and a swearing Jack, That thinks with oaths to face the matter out.","You have the nerve to call me daughter? Is this a father’s loving care—wanting to marry me off to a total madman, a worthless, irresponsible louse who thinks if he swears enough, he’ll get his way?"
"That talked of her have talked amiss of her. If she be curst, it is for policy, For she’s not froward, but modest as the dove. She is not hot, but temperate as the morn. And Roman Lucrece for her chastity. And to conclude, we have 'greed so well together, That upon Sunday is the wedding day.","Sir, this is the truth: you and the rest—all the people who have ever talked about her—have all been wrong. If she seems fierce, it’s for a reason. She’s not obstinate but gentle as the dove, not high-strung but peaceful as the morning. She has the patience of a Griselda Griselda was a much put-upon wife in medieval song and story. Lucretia was the wife of a Roman senator, famous for her chastity. Griselda and the modesty of Rome’s Lucrece. In short, we’ve gotten along so well that Sunday is our wedding day."
I’ll see thee hanged on Sunday first.,I’ll see you hanged on Sunday first!
"Hark, Petruchio: she says she’ll see thee hanged first.",Listen to that Petruchio: she says she’ll see you hanged first.
"Is this your speeding? Nay, then, good night our part.",Is this your idea of success? So much for our plan.
"Be patient, gentlemen. I choose her for myself. If she and I be pleased, what’s that to you? 'Tis bargained ’twixt us twain, being alone, I tell you, ’tis incredible to believe How much she loves me. O, the kindest Kate! She hung about my neck, and kiss on kiss She vied so fast, protesting oath on oath, O, you are novices! 'Tis a world to see, How tame, when men and women are alone, A meacock wretch can make the curstest shrew.— Give me thy hand, Kate. I will unto Venice Provide the feast, father, and bid the guests. I will be sure my Katherine shall be fine.","Relax, gentlemen. I’ve made my choice. If she and I are happy, what’s it to you? When we were alone, we agreed that in public she would go on being unpleasant. I tell you, though, it’s incredible how much she loves me. Darling Kate! She hung about my neck, smothering me with kisses, making vow after vow. In this way, she won my heart lickety-split! You men are rank beginners! It’s amazing how even a timid wretch can tame the most dreadful shrew, if the two are left alone together. Give me your hand, Kate. I’m off to Venice to buy outfits for the wedding. Plan the feast, sir, and invite the guests. I want my Katherine decked out in the finest clothes."
"I know not what to say, but give me your hands. God send you joy, Petruchio. 'Tis a match.","I don’t know what to say. Well, give me your hands. God give you joy, Petruchio. Call it a match!"
"Amen, say we. We will be witnesses.",Amen to that! We’ll be your witnesses.
"Father, and wife, and gentlemen, adieu. I will to Venice. Sunday comes apace. We will have rings, and things, and fine array, And kiss me, Kate. We will be married o' Sunday.","Father, wife, friends—farewell! I’m off to Venice. Sunday is just around the corner. We will have rings and things and fancy dress! So kiss me, Kate. We’re to be married on Sunday."
Was ever match clapped up so suddenly?,Was there ever a match put together so quickly?
"Faith, gentlemen, now I play a merchant’s part, And venture madly on a desperate mart.","Truly, gentlemen, this is a chancy piece of business. I’ve made a risky investment."
(as LUCENTIO) 'Twas a commodity lay fretting by you. 'Twill bring you gain or perish on the seas.,"(speaking as LUCENTIO) Yes, but the item was just gathering dust. This way, you’ll either make a profit by it or lose it on the high seas."
The gain I seek is quiet in the match.,The only profit I seek is a peaceful match.
"No doubt but he hath got a quiet catch. But now, Baptista, to your younger daughter. Now is the day we long have lookèd for. I am your neighbor, and was suitor first.","There’s no doubt that Petruchio’s got quite a catch. Now, Baptista, let’s turn to your younger daughter. We’ve been waiting a long time for this day. I’m your neighbor and came courting first."
Than words can witness or your thoughts can guess.,"(speaking as LUCENTIO) And I am one who loves Bianca more than words can express, more than you can imagine."
"Youngling, thou canst not love so dear as I.","Callow youth, you don’t yet know how to love!"
"(as LUCENTIO) Graybeard, thy love doth freeze.","(speaking as LUCENTIO) Old man, your love is ice."
But thine doth fry.,"And you’re all sizzle. Stand back, boy. Age is the thing that nourishes."
(as LUCENTIO) But youth in ladies' eyes that flourisheth.,"(speaking as LUCENTIO) Yes, but in the ladies' eyes, it’s youth that flourishes."
"Content you, gentlemen. I will compound this strife. 'Tis deeds must win the prize, and he of both That can assure my daughter greatest dower Say, Signior Gremio, what can you assure her?","Enough, gentlemen. I will settle this matter. Deeds “Deeds” is a pun; it means both actions (as opposed to words) and the legal documents for property and real estate. Deeds will determine the winner here. Whichever of you can promise Bianca the greatest dower shall have my daughter’s love. Tell me, Signior Gremio, what can you offer her?"
"First, as you know, my house within the city Is richly furnishèd with plate and gold, Basins and ewers to lave her dainty hands; In ivory coffers I have stuffed my crowns, In cypress chests my arras counterpoints, Costly apparel, tents, and canopies, Fine linen, Turkey cushions bossed with pearl, Pewter and brass, and all things that belong To house or housekeeping. Then, at my farm I have a hundred milch-kine to the pail, Six score fat oxen standing in my stalls, Myself am struck in years, I must confess, And if I die tomorrow this is hers, If whilst I live she will be only mine.","First of all, my house in the city, as you know, is filled with expensive furniture and household articles, china and gold, basins and pitchers for her to wash her dainty hands in. All my wall hangings are tapestries from Tyre. My ivory strongboxes are stuffed with gold, my wooden trunks filled with elegant rugs, expensive clothing, hangings and bed curtains, fine linens, Turkish cushions trimmed with pearls, Venetian draperies, pewter and brass, and everything else a household could possibly want. Then, at my farm I have a hundred milk cows, a hundred and twenty fat oxen in my stables, and all the equipment necessary to maintain them. I’m getting on in years, and if I died tomorrow, all this will belong to Bianca—if only while I live she’ll belong solely to me."
"(as LUCENTIO) I am my father’s heir and only son. If I may have your daughter to my wife, I’ll leave her houses three or four as good, Within rich Pisa walls, as any one Besides two thousand ducats by the year Of fruitful land, all which shall be her jointure.— What, have I pinched you, Signior Gremio?","(speaking as LUCENTIO) That “solely” is very much to the point. (to BAPTISTA) Sir, hear me out: I am my father’s only son and, as such, his sole heir. If you give me your daughter’s hand in marriage, she will end up with three or four houses in Pisa as good as any one that Gremio has in Padua—not to mention the two thousand ducats a year that my land earns me. All of which I’ll leave her in my will. Did I see you flinch, Signior Gremio?"
"Two thousand ducats by the year of land! That she shall have, besides an argosy That now is lying in Marcellus' road. (to TRANIO) What, have I choked you with an argosy?",Two thousand ducats a year from his land! (to himself) All my land together isn’t worth that much!—Aha! I forgot to mention the merchant ship that lies in Marseilles harbor. (to TRANIO) Sorry—have I caught you choking on a merchant ship?
"(as LUCENTIO) Gremio, ’tis known my father hath no less And twelve tight galleys. These I will assure her, And twice as much whate'er thou offer’st next.","(speaking as LUCENTIO) Please, Gremio! Everyone knows that my father has no less than three, huge merchant ships and fourteen galleys—two large and twelve small. These also I promise to Bianca—and whatever your next offer is, I’ll double it."
"Nay, I have offered all, I have no more, And she can have no more than all I have.","I have nothing else to offer. That’s everything I own. I can’t offer her more than all I have. (to BAPTISTA) If you choose me, she shall have me and mine."
"(as LUCENTIO) Why, then the maid is mine from all the world, By your firm promise. Gremio is outvied.","(speaking as LUCENTIO) In that case I, of all the men in the world, have won the maid, by your explicit promise. Gremio is outbid."
"I must confess your offer is the best, She is your own; else, you must pardon me. If you should die before him, where’s her dower?","I must admit your offer is the best. And provided that your father will be your guarantor, she shall be yours. Otherwise—forgive me, but if you should die before him, what becomes of her dowry?"
"(as LUCENTIO) That’s but a cavil: he is old, I young.","(speaking as LUCENTIO) That’s nothing! He is old, I’m young."
And may not young men die as well as old?,"Oh, and young men never die?"
"On Sunday next, you know My daughter Katherina is to be married. (to TRANIO as LUCENTIO) Now, on the Sunday following, shall Bianca If not, to Signior Gremio. And so I take my leave, and thank you both.","Well, gentlemen, that’s my decision. As you know, next Sunday my daughter Katherina is to be married. (to TRANIO as LUCENTIO) Therefore, the Sunday after, Bianca shall be married to you—if you obtain that guarantee. If not, she’ll be married to Signior Gremio. And so I thank you both and bid you goodbye."
"Adieu, good neighbor.","Farewell, good neighbor."
"Now I fear thee not. Sirrah young gamester, your father were a fool Set foot under thy table. Tut, a toy! An old Italian fox is not so kind, my boy.","Now I’m not worried. You there, young sport! Your father would be a fool to give you all his wealth and spend his declining years as a guest in your house. It’s absurd. An old Italian fox is never that generous, my boy."
"A vengeance on your crafty withered hide! Yet I have faced it with a card of ten. I see no reason but supposed Lucentio Must get a father, called “supposed Vincentio”— And that’s a wonder. Fathers commonly Do get their children. But in this case of wooing,","Sneaky, dried-up old coot! We’ll see who gets the upper hand! I’ve already bluffed pretty well—and without even a face card. I have a mind to help my master. Clearly, the fake Lucentio will have to produce a father—call him “fake Vincentio”—and it will be a miracle. Usually fathers produce children, not the other way around. But in this case of wooing, a child shall father his own father—if my wits don’t fail me."
"(as CAMBIO) Fiddler, forbear. You grow too forward, sir. Have you so soon forgot the entertainment Her sister Katherina welcomed you withal?","(speaking as CAMBIO) Restrain yourself, fiddler! You’re too insistent. Have you forgotten how her sister Katherine thanked you for your lessons?"
"(as LITIO) But, wrangling pedant, this is Then give me leave to have prerogative, And when in music we have spent an hour, Your lecture shall have leisure for as much.","(speaking as LITIO) Quarrelsome teacher! This lady is the queen of heavenly harmony. Therefore allow me to claim her attention first, and after we have spent an hour on music you can have equal time for your lecture."
"(as CAMBIO) Preposterous ass, that never read so far Was it not to refresh the mind of man After his studies or his usual pain? Then give me leave to read philosophy And, while I pause, serve in your harmony.","(as CAMBIO) Ridiculous ass! You’re not even educated enough to know why music was created. Wasn’t it to refresh the mind of man after his studies and daily toil? Therefore allow me to read philosophy with her, and then, when I am finished, indulge in your harmony."
"(as LITIO) Sirrah, I will not bear these braves of thine.","(as LITIO) Sir, you go too far! I will not stand for it!"
"Why, gentlemen, you do me double wrong To strive for that which resteth in my choice. I am no breeching scholar in the schools. I’ll not be tied to hours nor 'pointed times And, to cut off all strife, here sit we down.","Gentlemen, it seems to me you’re both out of line to be laying down the law about things that are really up to me. I am no schoolboy, and I won’t be dictated to with hours and schedules. I’ll have my lessons in the order and manner I prefer. So to cut short this argument, let’s figure this out."
"(to HORTENSIO) Take you your instrument, play you the whiles. His lecture will be done ere you have tuned.",(to HORTENSIO) You take your instrument and play awhile. He’ll be finished with his lecture before you’ve even tuned it.
(as LITIO) You’ll leave his lecture when I am in tune?,(as LITIO) You’ll leave his lecture when I’m in tune?
(aside) That will be never. (to HORTENSIO) Tune your instrument.,(to himself) That will be never. (to HORTENSIO) Tune your instrument.
Where left we last?,Where did we leave off?
"Here, madam: Hic ibat Simois, hic est Sigeia tellus,","Here, madam: Hic ibat Simois, hic est Sigeia tellus A line from Ovid. Hic ibat Simois, hic est Sigeia tellus , Hic steterat Priami regia celsa senis."
Conster them.,Translate.
"Hic ibat, as I told you before, Simois, I am Lucentio, hic est, son unto Vincentio of Pisa, Sigeia tellus, disguised thus to get your love, Hic steterat, and that “Lucentio” that comes a-wooing, Priami is my man Tranio, regia, bearing my port, celsa senis, that we might beguile the old pantaloon.","Hic ibat, as I told you before, Simois Properly translated: “Here ran the Simois river, here is the Sigeian land, here stood the sky-high palace of old Priam.” Simois , I am Lucentio, hic est, son of Vincentio of Pisa, Sigeia tellus, disguised as a teacher so as to win your love, Hic steterat, and the fellow who comes to court you calling himself “Lucentio,” Priami, is my servant Tranio, regia, pretending to be me, celsa senis, so we can get the better of the foolish old man."
"(as LITIO) Madam, my instrument’s in tune.","(as LITIO) Madam, my instrument’s in tune."
Let’s hear. (he plays) O fie! The treble jars.,"Let’s hear. (he plays) Oooh, no! The high note’s off."
"(as CAMBIO) Spit in the hole, man, and tune again.","(as CAMBIO) Spit on the tuning-peg, man, and try again."
"Now let me see if I can conster it. Hic ibat Simois, I know you not, hic est Sigeia tellus, I trust you not, Hic steterat Priami, take heed he hear us not, regia, presume not, celsa senis, despair not.","Now let me see if I can translate it. Hic ibat Simois, I don’t know you, hic est Sigeia tellus, I don’t trust you, Hic steterat Priami, don’t let him hear you, regia, don’t take anything for granted, celsa senis, don’t give up."
"(as LITIO) Madam, ’tis now in tune.","(as LITIO) Madam, now it really is in tune."
(as CAMBIO)      All but the base.,(as CAMBIO) All but the low note.
"(as LITIO) The base is right; ’tis the base knave that jars. Now, for my life, the knave doth court my love. Pedascule, I’ll watch you better yet.",(as LITIO) The low note’s fine; it’s this low-minded dog that’s out of tune! (to himself) How touchy and insistent this fellow is! I’m beginning to think he’s wooing my darling. Little professor! I’ll have to keep an eye on you.
"(to LUCENTIO) In time I may believe, yet I mistrust.","(to LUCENTIO) In time I may come to believe you, but I’m wary."
"Mistrust it not, for sure Aeacides","There’s no need to be, really, for— (he breaks off, seeing that HORTENSIO is listening, and pretends to go back to the Latin lesson)—“Aeacides” is just another name for Ajax. He gets it from his grandfather."
"I must believe my master; else, I promise you, I should be arguing still upon that doubt. But let it rest.—Now, Litio, to you. Good master, take it not unkindly, pray,","You’re my teacher, so I must believe you. Otherwise, I would have to argue the point with you. But let it go.—Now, Litio, it’s your turn. I hope, sir, that you’re not angry that I’ve been equally attentive to you both!"
"(as LITIO, to LUCENTIO) You may go walk, and give me leave awhile. My lessons make no music in three parts.","(as LITIO, to LUCENTIO) You can take a break. Leave us alone, why don’t you? I don’t teach music for a threesome."
"(as CAMBIO) Are you so formal, sir? Well, I must wait. Our fine musician groweth amorous.","(as CAMBIO) Well, aren’t we strict! Okay, I guess I’ll have to wait. (to himself) And watch, too. For unless I’m very much mistaken, our fancy musician is turning romantic!"
"(as LITIO) Madam, before you touch the instrument, To learn the order of my fingering I must begin with rudiments of art, More pleasant, pithy, and effectual Than hath been taught by any of my trade. And there it is in writing, fairly drawn.","(as LITIO) Madam, before you take up the instrument or begin to learn the fingering, I must teach you certain fundamentals. To help you remember the scales, I’ve come up with a little trick—more fun and effective than those that any of my colleagues use. Here, I’ve written it out."
"Why, I am past my gamut long ago.",I think I know my scales by now!
Yet read the gamut of Hortensio.,"(speaking as LITIO) Well, read Hortensio’s scale anyway."
"(reads) “Gamut I am, the ground of all accord: A re, to plead Hortensio’s passion; B mi, Bianca, take him for thy lord, D sol re, one clef, two notes have I; E la mi, show pity, or I die.” Call you this “gamut”? Tut, I like it not. Old fashions please me best. I am not so nice","(reading) “I am the scale, the basis of all harmony. A re, Im here to argue for Hortensio’s love; B mi, Bianca, take him for your husband, C fa ut, he loves you with all affection; D sol re, I have one clef but only two notes; E la mi, have pity on me, or I’ll die.” You call this a scale? I don’t like it. I don’t go in for these new-fangled methods. I like doing things the old-fashioned way."
"Mistress, your father prays you leave your books And help to dress your sister’s chamber up. You know tomorrow is the wedding day.","Mistress, your father requests that you leave your books and come help decorate your sister’s room. You know tomorrow is her wedding day."
"Farewell, sweet masters both. I must be gone.","Farewell to both of you, dear teachers. I have to go."
"(as CAMBIO) Faith, mistress, then I have no cause to stay.","(as CAMBIO) In that case, mistress, there’s no reason for me to stay."
"But I have cause to pry into this pedant. Methinks he looks as though he were in love. Yet if thy thoughts, Bianca, be so humble To cast thy wand'ring eyes on every stale, Hortensio will be quit with thee by changing.","But there’s reason for me to look more closely at this schoolmaster. He acts like a man in love. But if Bianca is so vulgar as to stoop for any man she sees, the hell with her. Whoever wants her can have her. The first time I catch her straying, it’s over. End of story."
"(to TRANIO) Signior Lucentio, this is the 'pointed day That Katherine and Petruchio should be married, And yet we hear not of our son-in-law. What will be said? What mockery will it be, To speak the ceremonial rites of marriage? What says Lucentio to this shame of ours?","(to TRANIO as LUCENTIO) Signior Lucentio, this is the day appointed for Katherine and Petruchio’s wedding, but there’s no sign of the groom. What will people say? To have the priest right here, ready to perform the marriage ceremony, and be missing a bridegroom! What do you think about our humiliation, Lucentio?"
"No shame but mine. I must, forsooth, be forced To give my hand, opposed against my heart, Who wooed in haste and means to wed at leisure. I told you, I, he was a frantic fool, Hiding his bitter jests in blunt behavior, And, to be noted for a merry man, Make friends, invite, and proclaim the banns, Yet never means to wed where he hath wooed. Now must the world point at poor Katherine And say, “Lo, there is mad Petruchio’s wife,","The humiliation is all mine. You forced me to accept this man against my will, this fancy con artist who was in such a hurry to get engaged. He has no intention of marrying me. I knew it—I told you. The whole thing was a joke. He pretends to be this simple, backward guy, but it’s all a gag to amuse his witty friends. He goes around proposing to women—they set a date, he gets introduced around, they send out the invitations and make a public announcement, but he has no intention of going through with it. So now everyone will point at me and say, “Look, there goes the wife of that comedian Petruchio—if he could be bothered to marry the pathetic thing!”"
"(as LUCENTIO) Patience, good Katherine, and Baptista too. Upon my life, Petruchio means but well, Whatever fortune stays him from his word: Though he be blunt, I know him passing wise;","(speaking as LUCENTIO) No, no, I assure you, Katherine—and you, too, Baptista—Petruchio means well, whatever circumstance prevents him from keeping his word. He’s rough-edged, but he’s a good man, and though he likes a joke, he’s not a liar."
"Would Katherine had never seen him, though!","Maybe, but I wish I’d never laid eyes on him."
"Go, girl. I cannot blame thee now to weep, For such an injury would vex a very saint, Much more a shrew of thy impatient humor.","Go, daughter. I cannot blame you now for weeping. An insult like this would try the patience of a saint, let alone a hot-tempered shrew like you!"
"Master, master! News, old news, and such news as you never heard of!","Master, master! I have news—old news such as you never heard before!"
Is it new and old too? How may that be?,You say you have news that’s old? How can that be?
"Why, is it not news to hear of Petruchio’s coming?","Well, is it not news that Petruchio’s coming?"
Is he come?,Is he here?
"Why, no, sir.","Why, no, sir."
What then?,What then?
He is coming.,He is coming.
When will he be here?,When will he be here?
When he stands where I am and sees you there.,When he stands where I am and sees you there.
"(as LUCENTIO) But say, what to thine old news?",(as LUCENTIO) So what’s the old news?
"Why, Petruchio is coming in a new hat and an old jerkin, a pair of old breeches thrice turned, a pair of boots that have been candle cases, one buckled, another laced; an old rusty sword ta'en out of the town armory, with a broken hilt and chapeless; with two broken points; his horse hipped, with an old mothy saddle and stirrups of no kindred, besides possessed with the glanders and like to mose in the chine, troubled with the lampass, infected with the fashions, full of wingdalls, sped with spavins, rayed with yellows, past cure of the fives, stark spoiled with the staggers, begnawn with the bots, swayed in the back and shoulder-shotten, near-legged before and with a half-checked bit and a headstall of sheeps leather, which, being restrained to keep him from stumbling, hath been often burst, and now repaired with knots, one girth six times pieced, and a woman’s crupper of velour, which hath two letters for her name fairly set down in studs, and here and there pieced with packthread.","Well, Petruchio is coming in a new hat and an old vest, a pair of old pants turned inside out, unmatched boots that have been used as spittoons, one buckled, the other laced; a rusty old sword from the town armory with a broken hilt and no scabbard. He’s got on worn-out garters and is riding a swayback old horse with a moth-eaten saddle, stirrups from two different sets, a bad hip, swollen glands, lockjaw, leg ulcers, bedsores, arthritis, jaundice, a hernia, hives, worms, cancer, a mossy overbite, and post-nasal drip. He’s knock-kneed too. His bit’s lopsided and his cardboard bridle, which breaks when you pull on it, is taped in a few places. The saddle strap is made out of patchwork, and the strap that goes under his tail to keep the saddle in place is velvet, with the initials of some woman written in studs."
Who comes with him?,Who comes with him?
"O, sir, his lackey, for all the world caparisoned like the horse; with a linen stock on one leg and a kersey boot-hose on the other, gartered with a red and blue list; an old hat and the humor of forty fancies pricked in ’t for a feather. A monster, a very monster in apparel, and not like a Christian footboy or a gentleman’s lackey.","Just his servant, sir—pretty much got up like the horse, with a linen stocking on one leg and a big woolen booty on the other, a pair of red and blue garters, and an old hat with something no one’s ever seen before where the feather should be. He’s dressed like a freak, a total freak, and not at all like a proper footman or a gentleman’s valet."
(as LUCENTIO) Yet oftentimes he goes but mean-appareled.,(as LUCENTIO) He must be in a strange mood to go in for this fashion—though from time to time he has been known to dress down.
"I am glad he’s come, howsoe'er he comes.","I am glad he’s coming, however he’s dressed."
"Why, sir, he comes not.","Why, sir, he’s not coming."
Didst thou not say he comes?,Didn’t you just say he was?
Who? That Petruchio came?,Who? Petruchio?
"Ay, that Petruchio came.","Yes, Petruchio."
"No, sir, I say his horse comes, with him on his back.","No, I said his horse is coming, with him on its back."
"Why, that’s all one.","Well, that’s the same thing."
"Nay, by Saint Jamy, A horse and a man Is more than one And yet not many.","No, by Saint Jamy, I’ll bet you a penny! A man and his horse Aren’t the same person— Not that there’s much difference."
"Come, where be these gallants? Who’s at home?",Whoa! Where is everybody?
"You are welcome, sir.","You are welcome, sir."
And yet I come not well.,I don’t feel well.
And yet you halt not.,I don’t notice you limping.
(as LUCENTIO) Not so well appareled as I wish you were.,(as LUCENTIO) And I would like it if you were a bit more formally dressed.
"Were it better I should rush in thus— How does my father? Gentles, methinks you frown. And wherefore gaze this goodly company As if they saw some wondrous monument, Some comet or unusual prodigy?","Isn’t it better this way? But where is Kate? Where is my lovely bride? (to BAPTISTA) How is my father-in-law? Gentlemen, you seem displeased. What’s everyone staring at? You look as if you’d seen something unusual—a comet or something."
"First were we sad, fearing you would not come, Now sadder that you come so unprovided. Fie, doff this habit, shame to your estate, An eyesore to our solemn festival.","Why, sir, you know this is your wedding day. First we were sad because we were afraid you wouldn’t come. Now we’re even sadder to see that you’ve come so unprepared. For heaven’s sake, take off that get-up. It’s a disgrace to a man of your social position and an insult to this solemn ceremony."
Hath all so long detained you from your wife And sent you hither so unlike yourself.,And tell us what extraordinary occurrence made you so late for your wedding and drove you to present yourself in an outfit that’s so—not typical of you.
"Tedious it were to tell and harsh to hear. Sufficeth I am come to keep my word, Which, at more leisure, I will so excuse As you shall well be satisfied withal. But where is Kate? I stay too long from her. The morning wears. 'Tis time we were at church.","It’s a long story—and tough to listen to. It’s enough that I’m here according to my promise, though I will have to deviate from it to some extent—for reasons which, when I explain them later, you’ll understand completely. But where is Kate? We’re wasting time here. It’s getting late and time we were in church."
"Go to my chamber, put on clothes of mine.",Don’t greet your bride in these disgraceful clothes. Go to my room and put on something of mine.
"Not I, believe me. Thus I’ll visit her.",Not me. I’ll see her like this.
"But thus, I trust, you will not marry her.",But surely you’re not planning to marry her in what you’re wearing!
"Good sooth, even thus. Therefore, ha' done with words: Could I repair what she will wear in me As I can change these poor accoutrements, 'Twere well for Kate and better for myself. But what a fool am I to chat with you, And seal the title with a lovely kiss!","Yes, just like this. But enough talk. It’s me she’s marrying and not my clothes. Though I expect she’ll wear me out more quickly than I’ll wear out what I’m wearing—which will be good for her and even better for me! But what a fool I am to stand here chatting when I should bid good morning to my bride and seal the bargain with a loving kiss."
"He hath some meaning in his mad attire. We will persuade him, be it possible, To put on better ere he go to church.","He must be wearing this crazy outfit for some reason. I’ll try to persuade him to put on something more appropriate before going to the church, if it’s at all possible."
"I’ll after him, and see the event of this.",I’ll go too and make sure that happens.
"But sir, to love concerneth us to add Her father’s liking, which to bring to pass, As I before unparted to your worship, I am to get a man—whate'er he be And he shall be “Vincentio of Pisa” And make assurance here in Padua Of greater sums than I have promisèd. So shall you quietly enjoy your hope","But sir, you need to get her father’s consent as well as her love. And to that end, as I explained to your worship, I’m looking for a man—any man, it doesn’t matter; we’ll suit him to our purpose—who can pretend to be your father, Vincentio. And he’ll guarantee the dowry—for even more money than I’ve promised on your behalf. This way, you’ll get your wish and marry sweet Bianca with her father’s consent and with the least possible hassle."
"Were it not that my fellow schoolmaster Doth watch Bianca’s steps so narrowly, 'Twere good, methinks, to steal our marriage, Which, once performed, let all the world say no,","If my fellow schoolmaster weren’t keeping such a close watch on her, I’d think about eloping. Then it wouldn’t matter what anyone said—I’d keep what’s mine, whatever the rest of the world said."
"That by degrees we mean to look into And watch our vantage in this business. We’ll overreach the graybeard, Gremio, The narrow-prying father, Minola, All for my master’s sake, Lucentio.","Don’t worry, I’m looking into that too. I’m on top of the situation—monitoring it very closely. We’ll outwit them all—that old geezer, Gremio; the suspicious father, Minola; the prim musician lover, Litio—all for the sake of my master, Lucentio."
"Signior Gremio, came you from the church?","Signior Gremio, are you coming from the church?"
As willingly as e'er I came from school.,As eagerly as I ever came from school.
(as LUCENTIO) And is the bride and bridegroom coming home?,(speaking as LUCENTIO) And will the bride and bridegroom be here soon?
"A grumbling groom, and that the girl shall find.","Bridegroom? This guy is more like the groom who cleans the stable—a grumbling groom at that, as the poor girl is discovering."
"(as LUCENTIO) Curster than she? Why, ’tis impossible.",(speaking as LUCENTIO) You mean he’s worse than she is? That’s not possible!
"Why, he’s a devil, a devil, a very fiend.","No, he’s a devil—a devil, I tell you! An utter fiend."
"(as LUCENTIO) Why, she’s a devil, a devil, the devil’s dam.","(speaking as LUCENTIO) No, she’s a devil—a devil, I tell you. The devil’s grandmother."
"I’ll tell you, Sir Lucentio: when the priest Should ask if Katherine should be his wife, “Ay, by gogs wouns!” quoth he, and swore so loud That, all amazed, the priest let fall the book, The mad-brained bridegroom took him such a cuff That down fell priest and book, and book and priest. “Now take them up,” quoth he, “if any list.”","Why, she’s a lamb, a dove, a child compared to him! Picture this: when the priest asked Katherine if she would have him, he answered, “Hell, yes!” and swore so loud that the priest drops the prayer book. Everyone froze, and as the priest stooped to pick it up again the lunatic bridegroom smacked him so hard that the priest and book went flying! Then he said, “Now pick them up—if anyone dares.”"
(as LUCENTIO) What said the wench when he rose again?,(as LUCENTIO) What did the girl say when the priest got up?
"As if the vicar meant to cozen him. But after many ceremonies done, He calls for wine. “A health!” quoth he, as if He had been aboard, carousing to his mates And threw the sops all in the sexton’s face, Having no other reason But that his beard grew thin and hungerly And seemed to ask him sops as he was drinking. And kissed her lips with such a clamorous smack That at the parting all the church did echo. And I, seeing this, came thence for very shame, And after me, I know, the rout is coming.","She trembled and shook because he stamped and swore and carried on as though the vicar were trying to put something over on him. Finally, the ceremony done, he called for wine. “A health!” he shouted, like some sailor aboard ship, carousing with his mates after a storm. Then he chugs the wine and throws the dregs in the sexton’s face. Why? Because the fellow’s beard looked thin, he said, and it seemed to be asking him for the dregs while he was drinking. Next he slung his arm around the bride’s neck and kissed her with such a smack that when they parted the sound of their lips made the whole church echo. That was the limit for me. I got out of there as fast as I could. I know the rest of the crowd isn’t far behind me. It’s disgraceful! You never saw such a mockery of a marriage in your life!"
"Hark, hark! I hear the minstrels play.",There go the minstrels. They’ve started up.
"Gentlemen and friends, I thank you for you I know you think to dine with me today And have prepared great store of wedding cheer, And therefore here I mean to take my leave.","Gentlemen and friends, thanks for bothering to come. I know you expected me to stay to dinner and have prepared a celebratory feast, but as it happens I’m called away. So let me say goodbye."
Is ’t possible you will away tonight?,"You’re not thinking of leaving tonight, surely?"
"I must away today, before night come. Make it no wonder. If you knew my business, And, honest company, I thank you all, That have beheld me give away myself To this most patient, sweet and virtuous wife. Dine with my father, drink a health to me,","Not tonight—today. If you knew the reason, you’d understand and would urge me to go rather than stay. Good friends, I thank you all for coming to see me wed this patient, sweet, virtuous wife. Dine with my father and drink a health to me. I have to leave. Goodbye to you all."
(as LUCENTIO) Let us entreat you stay till after dinner.,"(as LUCENTIO) Please, stay till after dinner."
It may not be.,Can’t do it.
Let me entreat you.,As a favor to me?
It cannot be.,Nope.
Let me entreat you.,As a favor to me?
I am content.,I’m delighted.
Are you content to stay?,Delighted to stay?
"I am content you shall entreat me stay, But yet not stay, entreat me how you can.","Delighted to hear you ask so nicely, but I won’t stay in any case."
"Now, if you love me, stay.","Look, if you love me, stay."
"Grumio, my horse.","Grumio, get me my horse."
"Ay, sir, they be ready. The oats have eaten the horses.","Yes, sir, they’re ready. They’ve eaten themselves sick."
"Do what thou canst, I will not go today, No, nor tomorrow, not till I please myself. The door is open, sir. There lies your way. You may be jogging whiles your boots are green. 'Tis like you’ll prove a jolly surly groom, That take it on you at the first so roundly.","All right, then, do what you like. I won’t leave today. Not tomorrow, either. I’ll leave when I’m good and ready. The door is open, sir. Feel free to use it. Go on, wear your boots out! As for me, I’ll leave when I like. If you’re this high-handed to start with, I can imagine how arrogant and arbitrary you’ll be as a husband."
"O Kate, content thee. Prithee, be not angry.","Calm down, Kate. Please don’t be angry."
I will be angry. What hast thou to do?—,"I will be angry. What business is it of yours?—Father, be quiet. He’ll stay as long as I say."
"Ay, marry, sir, now it begins to work.","Okay, now it starts!"
"Gentlemen, forward to the bridal dinner. I see a woman may be made a fool If she had not a spirit to resist.","Gentlemen, on to the bridal dinner. I see a woman may be made a fool of if she doesn’t have nerve enough to stand up for herself."
"Obey the bride, you that attend on her. Go to the feast, revel and domineer, Carouse full measure to her maidenhead, Be mad and merry, or go hang yourselves. Nay, look not big, nor stamp, nor stare, nor fret; I will be master of what is mine own. She is my goods, my chattels; she is my house, My household stuff, my field, my barn, And here she stands, touch her whoever dare. I’ll bring mine action on the proudest he That stops my way in Padua.—Grumio, Draw forth thy weapon, we are beset with thieves. Fear not, sweet wench, they shall not touch thee, Kate. I’ll buckler thee against a million.","They shall go in to the bridal dinner, Kate—they’re yours to command. Obey the bride, guests! Go to the banquet: revel, feast, and carouse! Drink yourselves silly toasting her virginity! Be wild and merry—or go to hell. But as for my bonny Kate, she must come with me. No, don’t puff out your chests and stamp and stare wonderingly. I will be master of what belongs to me. She is my property, one of my possessions—just like my house and everything in it, and my field, my barn, my horse, my ox, my donkey—anything of mine you care to name. Here she is; I dare you to touch her! I’ll sue anyone in Padua who tries to stand in my way, no matter how powerful he is.—Grumio, draw your sword! We are surrounded by thieves. Rescue your mistress! Prove yourself a man! Don’t be afraid, sweet girl, I won’t let them touch you. I’ll protect you, Kate, against a million of them."
"Nay, let them go, a couple of quiet ones.","No, let them go. They’re certainly a peaceful couple!"
"Went they not quickly, I should die with laughing.","If they hadn’t left soon, I would have died laughing."
(as LUCENTIO) Of all mad matches never was the like.,"(as LUCENTIO) Of all the mad matches, this is by far the craziest."
"(as CAMBIO) Mistress, what’s your opinion of your sister?","(as CAMBIO) Mistress, what’s your opinion of your sister?"
"That, being mad herself, she’s madly mated.","That since she’s mad herself, she’s married a madman."
"I warrant him, Petruchio is Kated.","I guarantee you, Petruchio’s going to suffer from his Kate."
"Neighbors and friends, though bride and bridegroom wants You know there wants no junkets at the feast.","Neighbors and friends, though we don’t have anyone for the bride and bridegroom’s places at the table, you know there’s nothing missing in the feast itself."
"(to TRANIO) Lucentio, you shall supply the bridegroom’s place, And let Bianca take her sister’s room.","(to TRANIO) Lucentio, you shall assume the bridegroom’s place and let Bianca take her sister’s seat."
(as LUCENTIO) Shall sweet Bianca practice how to bride it?,(as LUCENTIO) Shall sweet Bianca practice how to be a bride?
"She shall, Lucentio. Come, gentlemen, let’s go.","She shall, Lucentio. Come, gentlemen, let’s go in."
"Fie, fie on all tired jades, on all mad masters, and all foul ways! Was ever man so beaten? Was ever man so 'rayed? Was ever man so weary? I am sent before to make a fire, and they are coming after to warm them. Now, were not I a little pot and soon hot, my very lips might freeze to my teeth, my tongue to the roof of my mouth, my heart in my belly, ere I should come by a fire to thaw me. But I with blowing the fire shall warm myself. For, considering the weather, a taller man than I will take cold.—Holla, ho! Curtis!","To hell with all worn-out horses, all crazy masters, and all bad roads. Was a man ever beaten as much as me? Was a man ever as dirty as me? Was a man ever so tired? I have been sent on ahead to light a fire, and they are coming after to warm themselves. It’s a good thing I’m like a little pot and warm up quickly, or else my lips themselves would freeze and stick to my teeth, my tongue to the roof of my mouth, and my heart would freeze in my belly, before I managed to get thawed out. I’ll warm myself by blowing on the fire. A taller man than I would catch cold in weather like this. Hey! Curtis! Hello!"
Who is that calls so coldly?,Who calls so coldly?
"A piece of ice. If thou doubt it, thou mayst slide from my shoulder to my heel with no greater a run but my head and my neck. A fire, good Curtis.","A piece of ice. Trust me, you could slide all the way from my shoulder to my heel taking no more of a running start than the distance between my head and my neck. Start the fire, good Curtis."
"Is my master and his wife coming, Grumio?","Are my master and his wife coming, Grumio?"
"Oh, ay, Curtis, ay, and therefore fire, fire. Cast on no water.","Yes, yes, Curtis, so hurry up and start the fire. Leave out the water."
Is she so hot a shrew as she’s reported?,Is she as fiery a shrew as they say?
"She was, good Curtis, before this frost. But thou knowest winter tames man, woman and beast, for it hath tamed my old master and my new mistress and myself, fellow Curtis.","Well she was, good Curtis, before this frost. But you know how winter tames man, woman, and beast. And it’s tamed my old master and my new mistress and myself, my good colleague."
"Away, you three-inch fool! I am no beast.","Who are you calling “beast,” midget. You’re no bigger than three inches!"
"Am I but three inches? Why, thy horn is a foot, and so long am I, at the least. But wilt thou make a fire, or shall I complain on thee to our mistress, whose hand, she being now at hand, thou shalt soon feel, to thy cold comfort, for being slow in thy hot office?","Three inches? Really? Your horn is a foot long, and I’m at least that size. Now are you going to make a fire, or am I going to have to report you to our mistress, whose hand, now that she is herself at hand, you’ll be feeling soon. You’ll find it cold comfort, but that’s what you get for being slow with your warming duties."
"I prithee, good Grumio, tell me, how goes the world?","So tell me, Grumio, how goes the world?"
"A cold world, Curtis, in every office but thine, and therefore fire! Do thy duty, and have thy duty, for my master and mistress are almost frozen to death.","Cold, Curtis. It’s a cold world, except for people who have to start fires. Therefore, do your duty and take your reward, because my master and mistress are nearly frozen to death."
"There’s fire ready. And therefore, good Grumio, the news.","The fire is ready. So go on, tell me the news."
"Why, “Jack, boy! Ho, boy!” and as much news as wilt thou.","“ Why, Jack boy, ho boy Grumio response is a line from a song. Why, Jack boy, ho boy !” and all the news you want."
"Come, you are so full of cony-catching!","Oh, you’re just so funny."
"Why, therefore fire, for I have caught extreme cold. Where’s the cook? Is supper ready, the house trimmed, rushes strewed, cobwebs swept, the servingmen in their new fustian, their white stockings, and every officer his wedding garment on? Be the Jacks fair within, the Jills fair without, the carpets laid, and everything in order?","Well, make a fire, then. I think I’m getting delirious. Where’s the cook? Is supper ready? Is the house fixed up, the floor covered, the cobwebs swept out of the corners, the servingmen in their new work clothes and the household servants each in his wedding suit? Are all the cups and glasses in their places, the tablecloths laid out—everything in order?"
"All ready. And therefore, I pray thee, news.",Everything’s ready. So tell me what’s been going on.
"First, know my horse is tired, my master and mistress fallen out.","Well, first of all, my horse is tired and my master and mistress have had a falling out."
How?,How?
"Out of their saddles into the dirt, and thereby hangs a tale.",From their saddles into the dirt—but that’s another story.
"Let’s ha' ’t, good Grumio.","Well, let’s have it, Grumio."
Lend thine ear.,Lean forward.
Here.,Here.
There!,There!
"This ’tis to feel a tale, not to hear a tale.","This is to feel the news, not hear it."
"And therefore ’tis called a sensible tale. And this cuff was but to knock at your ear and beseech list'ning. Now I begin: Imprimis, we came down a foul hill, my master riding behind my mistress—","That’s what makes it “sensitive” news. I was just knocking to see if anyone was home. Now, I’ll begin: first, we came down a steep hill, my master riding behind my mistress—"
Both of one horse?,Both on one horse?
What’s that to thee?,What’s the difference?
"Why, a horse.","Well, the difference of a horse!"
"Tell thou the tale! But hadst thou not crossed me, thou shouldst have heard how her horse fell, and she under her horse. Thou shouldst have heard in how miry a place, how she was bemoiled, how he left her with the horse upon her, how he beat me because her horse stumbled, how she waded through the dirt to pluck him off me, how he swore, how she prayed that never prayed before, how I cried, how the horses ran away, how her bridle was burst, how I lost my crupper, with many things of worthy memory which now shall die in oblivion, and thou return unexperienced to thy grave.","Oh, tell it yourself if you’re so smart. It’s too bad. If you hadn’t made me angry, you would have heard all about how her horse fell with her under it, how swampy the place was, too, and how she was covered in mud, and how he left her like that, with the horse on top of her, and how he beat me because her horse stumbled, and how she waded through the dirt to pull him off me, and how he swore, how she prayed—this woman who never prayed before—and how I yelled, and how the horses ran away, and how her bridle broke, and how I lost my riding crop, and many other things worth telling, which now will all be lost to memory, and you’ll go to your grave ignorant."
By this reck'ning he is more shrew than she.,"By the sound of it, he’s a bigger shrew than she is."
"Ay, and that thou and the proudest of you all shall find when he comes home. But what talk I of this? Call forth Nathaniel, Joseph, Nicholas, Philip, Walter, Sugarsop, and the rest. Let their heads be slickly combed, their blue coats brushed, and their garters of an indifferent knit. Let them curtsy with their left legs, and not presume to touch a hair of my master’s horse-tail till they kiss their hands. Are they all ready?","Yes—as you and the rest will find out as soon as he’s home. But why am I telling you this? Get them in here—Nathaniel, Joseph, Nicholas, Philip, Walter, Sugarsop, and the rest. Tell them to slick down their hair, brush their blue coats, and make sure their socks match. Have them click their heels together and don’t dare touch a hair of the master’s horse’s tail till they kiss their hands. Are they all ready?"
They are.,They are.
Call them forth.,Get them in here.
"(calling offstage) Do you hear, ho? you must meet my master to countenance my mistress.",(calling offstage) Hey! Does anyone hear me? Hey! You have to come and greet the master and face the new mistress.
"Why, she hath a face of her own.",She already has a face.
Who knows not that?,"Yeah, so?"
"Thou, it seems, that calls for company to countenance her.",You just said they had to face her.
I call them forth to credit her.,I meant they had to give her credit.
"Why, she comes to borrow nothing of them.",She’s not going to borrow money from them.
"Welcome home, Grumio.","Welcome home, Grumio."
"How now, Grumio?","What’s up, Grumio?"
"What, Grumio!","Hey, Grumio!"
Fellow Grumio!,My man Grumio!
"How now, old lad?","So what’s the story, old boy?"
"Welcome, you!—How now, you?—What, you!—Fellow, you!—And thus much for greeting. Now, my spruce companions, is all ready, and all things neat?","Welcome yourself!—What’s up with you?—Hey to you!—So much for greetings. Now, my well-dressed friends, is everything ready and in order?"
All things is ready. How near is our master?,Everything’s ready. How soon will the master be here?
"E'en at hand, alighted by this. And therefore be not— Cock’s passion, silence! I hear my master.","Any minute. Probably here already. So be careful, and don’t—God! Quiet, I hear him coming."
"Where be these knaves? What, no man at door Where is Nathaniel, Gregory, Philip?",Where are those bastards? Where is the boy who’s supposed to help me get off my horse and take him to the stable? Where is Nathaniel? Where’s Gregory? Where’s Philip?
"Here, here, sir! Here, sir!","Here, here, sir! Here, sir!"
"“Here, sir! Here, sir! Here, sir! Here, sir!” You loggerheaded and unpolished grooms! Where is the foolish knave I sent before?","“Here, sir! Here, sir! Here, sir! Here, sir!” You stupid, unpolished dolts! I get no service, no respect, no attention! Where is the fool I sent on ahead?"
"Here, sir, as foolish as I was before.","Here, sir, as foolish as ever."
You peasant swain! You whoreson malt-horse drudge! Did I not bid thee meet me in the park,You unwashed farmworker! You bastard workhorse drudge! Didn’t I tell you to meet me outside and bring these morons with you?
"Nathaniel’s coat, sir, was not fully made, And Gabriel’s pumps were all unpinked i' th' heel. There was no link to color Peter’s hat, And Walter’s dagger was not come from sheathing. The rest were ragged, old, and beggarly. Yet, as they are, here are they come to meet you.","Nathaniel’s coat was being fixed, sir. And one of Gabriel’s shoes had a broken heel. And Peter couldn’t find a matching hat. And Walter couldn’t get his dagger out of its sheath. Only Adam, Rafe, and Gregory were ready. The rest were just a mess—but such as they are, sir, they’re here to welcome you."
"Go, rascals, go, and fetch my supper in.","Go, blockheads, go, and bring my supper to me."
"Singing Where are those—Sit down, Kate, and welcome.— Soud, soud, soud, soud!","(singing) Where is the life I led until recently? Where are those—Sit down, Kate, make yourself at home.—Come on, come on, come on, come on."
"Why, when, I say?—Nay, good sweet Kate, be merry.— Off with my boots, you rogues! You villains, when?","Did I say later? I said now!—Smile, Kate! Be happy.—Get my boots off, you apes! You idiots, now!"
"It was the friar of orders gray, As he forth walkèd on his way:— A servant tries to take off PETRUCHIO’s boots. Out, you rogue! You pluck my foot awry. Strikes him Be merry, Kate.—Some water, here, what, ho! Where’s my spaniel Troilus? Sirrah, get you hence And bid my cousin Ferdinand come hither.","(singing) It was a friar in robes of gray, who walked along the road one day:—(a servant tries to take off PETRUCHIO’s boots) Stop, you moron! You’re twisting my foot! Take that, and see you do a better job with the other one. (he strikes the servant) Be happy, Kate!—Bring me some water! Where’s my spaniel Troilus? Hey boy, go tell my cousin Ferdinand to get in here."
Where are my slippers? Shall I have some water?—,"You’ll love this guy, Kate—anyway, you’d better! Where are my slippers? Can we have some water please here?—"
"Come, Kate, and wash, and welcome heartily.— You whoreson villain! Will you let it fall? Strikes him","Come and wash, Kate, make yourself at home. Son of a bitch, you spilled it! (he strikes the servant)"
"Patience, I pray you! 'Twas a fault unwilling.",Take it easy! Please! It was just an accident!
"A whoreson, beetle-headed, flap-eared knave!— Come, Kate, sit down. I know you have a stomach. Will you give thanks, sweet Kate, or else shall I?— What’s this? Mutton?","He’s a son of a bitch, a moron, a total jerk.—Come sit down, Kate, I know you must be hungry. Will you say grace, sweet Kate, or shall I?—What is this? Mutton?"
Ay.,Yes.
Who brought it?,Who brought it out here?
I.,I did.
"'Tis burnt, and so is all the meat. What dogs are these! Where is the rascal cook? How durst you, villains, bring it from the dresser And serve it thus to me that love it not? Throws the meat, & c. about the stage You heedless joltheads and unmannered slaves! What, do you grumble? I’ll be with you straight.","It’s burnt. The whole thing is burnt. You bastards! Where is that moron of a cook? You devils! How dare you serve it to me this way! There, take it all back—plates, cups, the whole thing. (throws the meat and everything else around the stage) You careless blockheads and unwashed slaves! I heard that! I’ll deal with you in a minute."
"I pray you, husband, be not so disquiet.","Please, dear, calm down. The meat was fine if you wanted to eat it."
"I tell thee, Kate, ’twas burnt and dried away. And I expressly am forbid to touch it, For it engenders choler, planteth anger; And better ’twere that both of us did fast, Than feed it with such over-roasted flesh. Be patient, tomorrow ’t shall be mended, And, for this night, we’ll fast for company.","And I’m telling you it was burnt and dried out. I’m not allowed to eat overcooked meat Overcooked meat was through to produce choler, one of the four humors—the one that gave rise to anger. overcooked meat . It gives me indigestion and that makes me irritable. Very, very irritable.Better for us to go hungry, since we’re both hotheaded, than for us to eat meat that’s been cooked too long. But don’t worry, tomorrow it will get straightened out. Tonight we’ll go without food."
"Come, I will bring thee to thy bridal chamber.","Come, I’ll show you your bridal chamber."
"Peter, didst ever see the like?","Peter, did you ever see anything like it?"
He kills her in her own humor.,He’s giving her a taste of her own medicine.
Where is he?,Where is he?
"In her chamber, Making a sermon of continency to her, Knows not which way to stand, to look, to speak, And sits as one new-risen from a dream. Away, away, for he is coming hither!","In her room, lecturing her on the virtues of self-control. He rants and rails and swears and she, poor thing, doesn’t know how to stand or look or speak. She sits like a person who’s just woken up from a dream. Look out, he’s coming!"
"Thus have I politicly begun my reign, My falcon now is sharp and passing empty, And, till she stoop, she must not be full-gorged, For then she never looks upon her lure. Another way I have to man my haggard,","Well, I’ve begun my reign with a carefully thought-out plan, and I have every hope of succeeding. My falcon is now hungry and unfed and must not be given enough to eat until she comes to me, for if her hunger is satisfied, she’ll pay no attention to the bait. I have another plan to make my bird come to me and recognize her owner’s call is to keep her from sleeping—"
"That is, to watch her, as we watch these kites That bate and beat and will not be obedient. She ate no meat today, nor none shall eat. Last night she slept not, nor tonight she shall not. I’ll find about the making of the bed, And here I’ll fling the pillow, there the bolster, This way the coverlet, another way the sheets. Ay, and amid this hurly I intend And, in conclusion, she shall watch all night, And if she chance to nod I’ll rail and brawl, And with the clamor keep her still awake. This is a way to kill a wife with kindness, He that knows better how to tame a shrew, Now let him speak; ’tis charity to show.","the way trainers do with young hawks that flutter and flap and will not obey. She had no food today and will have none. Last night she got no sleep, and she won’t get any tonight. Just as I did with the meat, I’ll make up some problem with the way the bed is made, and throw the pillow one way and the cushion the other, and the blanket over here and the sheets over there. And through all the shouting and fuss, I’ll swear that it’s all out of love for her. The end result will be that she’ll sit up all night. And if she starts to drop off, I’ll rant and yell until I wake her up. This is how to kill a wife with kindness. And this way I’ll cure her wild and willful nature. If anyone here knows a better way to tame a shrew, speak up, please. It would be much appreciated."
"(as LUCENTIO) Is ’t possible, friend Litio, that mistress Bianca Doth fancy any other but Lucentio? I tell you, sir, she bears me fair in hand.","(as LUCENTIO) I don’t believe it, Litio. It’s not possible that Bianca could prefer another man to me. I’ve seen the way she behaves."
Stand by and mark the manner of his teaching. They stand aside,(as LITIO) You want proof of what I’m telling you? Stand right here and watch this fellow’s “lesson.” (they stand off to one side)
"(as CAMBIO) Now, mistress, profit you in what you read?","(as CAMBIO) Well, mistress, are you learning from what you’re reading?"
"What, master, read you? First resolve me that.","What are you reading, teacher? Answer me that first."
"(as CAMBIO) I read that I profess, The Art to Love.",(as CAMBIO) I’m reading the book I know best— The Art of Love Ovid the Art of Love was a manual of seduction. The Art of Love
"And may you prove, sir, master of your art.",I hope you’re an expert in your field.
"(as CAMBIO) While you, sweet dear, prove mistress of my heart!","(as CAMBIO) Well, my dear, you’re the mistress of my heart in any case!"
"(as LITIO) Quick proceeders, marry! Now, tell me, I pray, You that durst swear that your mistress Bianca","(as LITIO) Quick work for schoolwork! How do you explain that? I though you said your precious Bianca loved no one better than you, Lucentio!"
"(as LUCENTIO) O despiteful love! Unconstant womankind! I tell thee, Litio, this is wonderful!","(as LUCENTIO) Oh spiteful love! Faithless womanhood! It’s incredible, Litio!"
"Mistake no more. I am not Litio, Nor a musician as I seem to be, For such a one as leaves a gentlema And makes a god of such a cullion. Know, sir, that I am called Hortensio.","Let me come clean. I’m not really Litio. I’m not even a musician, really. In fact, I refuse to go on with this charade for a woman who would choose a lower-class guy like this over a gentleman of my stature. My name is Hortensio, sir."
"(as LUCENTIO) Signior Hortensio, I have often heard And since mine eyes are witness of her lightness, I will with you, if you be so contented, Forswear Bianca and her love for ever.","(as LUCENTIO) Signior Hortensio, I’ve often heard of your total devotion to Bianca. So, now that I’ve seen with my own eyes proof of her worthlessness, I’m willing to join you in swearing her off for good, if you like."
"See how they kiss and court! Signior Lucentio, Never to woo her more, but do forswear her As one unworthy all the former favors That I have fondly flattered her withal.","Look how they kiss and carry on! Signior Lucentio, it’s a deal. I hereby swear to have nothing more to do with this girl. I formally declare her unworthy of all the attention and expense I have wasted on her."
And here I take the like unfeignèd oath Fie on her! See how beastly she doth court him!,"And I hereby make the same promise—never to marry her, not even if she begs me. The hell with her! Look how she carries on with him! It’s revolting!"
"Would all the world but he had quite forsworn! For me, that I may surely keep mine oath, I will be married to a wealthy widow, As I have loved this proud disdainful haggard. And so farewell, Signior Lucentio. Kindness in women, not their beauteous looks, Shall win my love, and so I take my leave,","I wish all her lovers had given her up. Well, to be on the safe side—so I don’t go back on my promise—I plan to get myself married to a wealthy widow within the next three days. She’s been after me for years—the way I’ve been for this proud, haughty hag. Farewell, then, Signior Lucentio. From now on, goodness in women, not superficial beauty, will win my heart. I bid you all goodbye. I’ve made up my mind, and I’m going to stick to it."
"Mistress Bianca, bless you with such grace As 'longeth to a lover’s blessèd case! Nay, I have ta'en you napping, gentle love, And have forsworn you with Hortensio.","Miss Bianca, may you be blessed with all the happiness you deserve. No, I’ve caught you out, my dear. You’re busted. Hortensio and I have given you up."
"Tranio, you jest. But have you both forsworn me?","You can’t mean it, Tranio! Have you both really given me up?"
"Mistress, we have.","Yes, ma'am, we have."
Then we are rid of Litio.,So Litio’s out of the picture.
"I' faith, he’ll have a lusty widow now That shall be wooed and wedded in a day.",He’s going after a young widow. He says he’ll court and win her in a day.
God give him joy!,"Well, good for him!"
"Ay, and he’ll tame her.","Yeah, and he’s going to tame her."
"He says so, Tranio?",Is that what he says?
"Faith, he is gone unto the taming school.",Yep. He’s gone to study at the taming school.
"The taming school? What, is there such a place?",The taming school? Is there such a place?
"Ay, mistress, and Petruchio is the master, To tame a shrew and charm her chattering tongue.","Yes, ma'am. Petruchio runs it. There he teaches piles of tricks for taming a shrew and her tongue."
"O master, master, I have watched so long That I am dog-weary, but at last I spied An ancient angel coming down the hill","Master, master, I’ve been on the lookout so long, I’m ready to fall down dead—but I’ve got one, finally! There’s a trustworthy old fellow coming down the hill who will do the job."
"What is he, Biondello?","What does he look like, Biondello?"
"Master, a marcantant, or a pedant, I know not what, but formal in apparel, In gait and countenance surely like a father.","A merchant or a schoolmaster, sir. Well, I don’t know exactly, but his clothes are respectable, and to judge from his face and walk, he’s old enough to be Lucentio’s father."
"And what of him, Tranio?","And what about him, Tranio?"
"I’ll make him glad to seem Vincentio And give assurance to Baptista Minola As if he were the right Vincentio. Take in your love, and then let me alone.","If he’s an easy mark and buys my story, I think I can get him to pose as Vincentio—and be as ready to vouch for you with Baptista Minola as the real Vincentio would. Go, take your sweetheart and leave him to me."
"God save you, sir.","May God keep you well, sir."
"(as LUCENTIO) And you, sir. You are welcome. Travel you far on, or are you at the farthest?","(as LUCENTIO) And you too, sir. Welcome. Are you going far, or is this your destination?"
"Sir, at the farthest for a week or two, But then up farther, and as far as Rome,","This is it, for now. Then, in a week or two, I’ll continue on as far as Rome, then on to Tripoli, God willing."
"(as LUCENTIO) What countryman, I pray?","(speaking as LUCENTIO) What country are you from, if I may ask?"
Of Mantua.,Mantua.
"(as LUCENTIO) Of Mantua, sir? Marry, God forbid! And come to Padua, careless of your life?","(as LUCENTIO) Mantua, sir? Oh Lord, I hope not. And coming to Padua? Do you want to get killed?"
"My life, sir! how, I pray? For that goes hard.",Killed? Why? That would be a little extreme!
"To come to Padua. Know you not the cause? Your ships are stayed at Venice, and the Duke, For private quarrel ’twixt your duke and him, Hath published and proclaimed it openly. You might have heard it else proclaimed about.","It’s a capital offense for anyone from Mantua to come to Padua. Didn’t you know? The Duke of Padua has publicly proclaimed it. He’s feuding with your duke, and all ships from Mantua are being held up at Venice. It’s strange that you haven’t heard. There are signs up all over town—but I guess it’s because you’ve only just arrived."
"Alas, sir, it is worse for me than so, For I have bills for money by exchange From Florence, and must here deliver them.","Oh dear, oh dear. This is very bad, very bad. I have promissory notes from Florence that I have to deliver."
"This will I do, and this I will advise you. First tell me, have you ever been at Pisa?","(as LUCENTIO) Well, look, just to be nice I’ll help you out and give you some advice to boot. First tell me, though—have you ever been to Pisa?"
"Ay, sir, in Pisa have I often been, Pisa renownèd for grave citizens.","Oh yes, sir, I have often been to Pisa—Pisa, City of Wise Men."
(as LUCENTIO) Among them know you one Vincentio?,(as LUCENTIO) There’s one of them called Vincentio? Do you know him?
"I know him not, but I have heard of him: A merchant of incomparable wealth.",I’ve heard of him but I’ve never met him. A merchant of unheard-of wealth.
"(as LUCENTIO) He is my father, sir, and sooth to say, In count'nance somewhat doth resemble you.","(as LUCENTIO) He is my father, sir, and I have to tell you—you look a little like him."
"(aside) As much as an apple doth an oyster, and all one.","(speaking to the audience) As much as an apple looks like an oyster, but whatever."
"(as LUCENTIO) To save your life in this extremity, This favor will I do you for his sake— And think it not the worst of all your fortunes That you are like to Sir Vincentio— And in my house you shall be friendly lodged. Look that you take upon you as you should. You understand me, sir. So shall you stay Till you have done your business in the city.","(as LUCENTIO) Under the circumstance, to save your life, here’s what I’m willing to do—and it’s actually not an unlucky thing that you happen to look like Sir Vincentio. We’ll pass you off as him—you can assume his name and reputation and stay in my house. You just have to act your part, you understand? You’ll stay here in the city until you’ve taken care of your business. If this is kindness, you’re welcome to it."
"O sir, I do, and will repute you ever The patron of my life and liberty.","Oh sir, I accept. And I’ll be eternally grateful to you."
"(as LUCENTIO) Then go with me to make the matter good. This, by the way, I let you understand: To pass assurance of a dower in marriage 'Twixt me and one Baptista’s daughter here. In all these circumstances I’ll instruct you. Go with me to clothe you as becomes you.","(as LUCENTIO) Then come with me and we’ll set it up. And, by the way, I should probably tell you: my father himself is coming any day to vouch for me in the matter of a dowry—a marriage contract between me and the daughter of a fellow named Baptista. I’ll fill you in on the whole situation. Come, let’s go and get your costume."
"No, no, forsooth, I dare not for my life.","No, no, I can’t, really. He’d kill me."
"The more my wrong, the more his spite appears. What, did he marry me to famish me? Beggars that come unto my father’s door If not, elsewhere they meet with charity. But I, who never knew how to entreat, Nor never needed that I should entreat, Am starved for meat, giddy for lack of sleep, And that which spites me more than all these wants, He does it under name of perfect love, As who should say, if I should sleep or eat, 'Twere deadly sickness or else present death. I care not what, so it be wholesome food.","The more I suffer, the more spiteful he becomes. Did he marry me just to starve me? Beggars at my father’s door are given money as soon as they ask for it. And if they don’t find charity there, they find it someplace else. But I, who have never known how to beg and never had to beg, am starved for food, dizzy with lack of sleep, kept awake with curses and fed with brawling. And what irks me more than all these things put together is that he does it under the pretense of love—as though for me to eat or sleep would bring on fatal illness or sudden death. Please, go and get me something to eat. I don’t care what so long as it’s nutritious."
What say you to a neat’s foot?,What do you say to a calf’s foot?
'Tis passing good. I prithee let me have it.,"Oh, lovely. Can I have some?"
I fear it is too choleric a meat.,"I’m afraid it will raise your blood pressure “Choleric” = angry raise your blood pressure . What do you say to an ox stomach, nicely broiled?"
"I like it well. Good Grumio, fetch it me.","I’d love it. Nice Grumio, bring me some."
I cannot tell. I fear ’tis choleric. What say you to a piece of beef and mustard?,"I don’t know. I’m afraid it will make you too hot, too. What do you say to a piece of beef with mustard?"
A dish that I do love to feed upon.,A favorite dish of mine.
"Ay, but the mustard is too hot a little.","Yes, but the mustard is probably too hot."
"Why then, the beef, and let the mustard rest.","Well then, the beef without the mustard."
"Nay then, I will not. You shall have the mustard Or else you get no beef of Grumio.",Absolutely not. You’ll take the mustard or you’ll get no beef from Grumio.
"Then both, or one, or anything thou wilt.","Then both, or one, or anything you like."
"Why then, the mustard without the beef.",How about the mustard without the beef.
Beats him That feed’st me with the very name of meat. Sorrow on thee and all the pack of you That triumph thus upon my misery.,"Get out of here, you measly, lying wretch. (she beats him.) You feed me with only the names of foods. To hell with you and the whole pack of you who triumph at my misery. Go on, I said get out of here."
"How fares my Kate? What, sweeting, all amort?","How is my Kate? Feeling blue, darling?"
"Mistress, what cheer?","Mistress, how are you?"
"Faith, as cold as can be.","Believe me, I’ve been better."
"Pluck up thy spirits. Look cheerfully upon me. Here love, thou seest how diligent I am, I am sure, sweet Kate, this kindness merits thanks. What, not a word? Nay, then thou lov’st it not And all my pains is sorted to no proof. Here, take away this dish.","Cheer up. Give us a smile. Look, love, see how devoted I am? I’ve prepared a meal for you myself, and here it is. I am sure, sweet Kate, this kindness deserves thanks. What, not a word? I guess you don’t want it. Ah well, all my trouble was for nothing. Here, take away the dish."
"I pray you, let it stand.","Please, leave it here."
"And so shall mine, before you touch the meat.","The smallest service is repaid with thanks. Mine will be, too, before you touch the food."
"I thank you, sir.","Thank you, sir."
"Signior Petruchio, fie, you are to blame. Come, mistress Kate, I’ll bear you company.","Shame on you, Petruchio! You are too harsh. Come, mistress Kate, I’ll join you."
"Eat it up all, Hortensio, if thou lovest me.— Much good do it unto thy gentle heart. Kate, eat apace. And now, my honey love, Will we return unto thy father’s house With silken coats and caps and golden rings, With ruffs and cuffs and farthingales and things, With scarves and fans and double change of brav'ry, With amber bracelets, beads, and all this knav'ry. To deck thy body with his ruffling treasure.","(speaking so that only HORTENSIO can hear) Do me a favor and scarf it all down yourself, Hortensio.—May it do your gentle heart good, Kate. Eat up quickly, my honey lamb, we’re off to your father’s house to join in the revelry, where we’ll dress as well as the best of them, with silk robes and caps and golden rings, collars and cuffs and fancy frocks and things, with scarves and fans and two changes of clothes, amber bracelets, beads, and plenty of gewgaws. All finished? The tailor is waiting to deck you out in ruffled finery."
"Come, tailor, let us see these ornaments. Lay forth the gown.","Now, tailor, let’s see what you’ve got. Lay out the gown."
"What news with you, sir?","What can I do for you, sir?"
Here is the cap your Worship did bespeak.,Here is the cap your Worship ordered.
"A velvet dish! Fie, fie, ’tis lewd and filthy! Why, ’tis a cockle or a walnut shell, A knack, a toy, a trick, a baby’s cap. Away with it! Come, let me have a bigger.","Why, this was modeled on a porridge bowl! It’s a velvet dish! No, definitely not! It’s cheap and nasty! It’s like a cockleshell or a walnut shell, a joke, a prank, a doll’s cap. Take it away. Bring me a bigger one."
And gentlewomen wear such caps as these.,I won’t have one any bigger. This is the fashion. Gentlewomen are wearing caps like this right now.
"When you are gentle, you shall have one too, And not till then.","When you are gentle, you shall have one, too, and not till then."
(aside) That will not be in haste.,(to himself) That won’t be anytime soon.
"And speak I will. I am no child, no babe. Your betters have endured me say my mind, And if you cannot, best you stop your ears. My tongue will tell the anger of my heart And, rather than it shall, I will be free Even to the uttermost, as I please, in words.","Sir, I think I have the right to speak, and speak I certainly will. I am not a child or an infant. Better men than you have heard me speak my mind, and if you can’t take it, then you’d better plug your ears. I’ll express my anger or die concealing it. And rather than have that happen, I’ll give myself permission to speak as freely as I like, whatever I may have to say."
"Why, thou say’st true. It is a paltry cap, A custard-coffin, a bauble, a silken pie.","You know, you’re right. It’s a measly little cap, a dessert crust, a plaything, a silk pie. I love you all the more for not liking it."
"Love me or love me not, I like the cap, And it I will have, or I will have none.","I don’t care if you love me or not, I like the cap and I’ll have it or I won’t have any."
"Thy gown? Why, ay. Come, tailor, let us see ’t. O mercy, God! What masking stuff is here?","Now, your gown? Yes, yes. Come, tailor, show it to us. Merciful God! What sort of costume do we have here? What do you call this? A sleeve? It’s like a cannon."
"What, up and down, carved like an apple tart? Here’s snip and nip and cut and slish and slash, Like to a censer in a barber’s shop. Why, what i' devil’s name, tailor, call’st thou this?","What have you done? Carved it up and down like an apple tart? Snip and snip and cut and slash—it’s got more holes than a sieve! What in the world do you call this, tailor!"
(aside) I see she’s like to have neither cap nor gown.,(to himself) I see she’s likely to have neither cap nor gown.
"You bid me make it orderly and well, According to the fashion and the time.",You told me to make it well and properly and in keeping with the current style.
"Marry, and did. But if you be remembered, I did not bid you mar it to the time. For you shall hop without my custom, sir. I’ll none of it. Hence, make your best of it.","Certainly, I did. But if you remember, I didn’t tell you to parody the style. Go on home, sir. You’ve lost me as a customer. I won’t take it. Do whatever you want with it."
"I never saw a better-fashioned gown, More quaint, more pleasing, nor more commendable.","I never saw a better-designed gown, more elegant and pleasing and well made. Perhaps you think you can make me into some sort of plaything?"
"Why, true, he means to make a puppet of thee.","Yes, that’s it! The tailor thinks he can make you into some sort of plaything."
She says your Worship means to make a puppet of her.,She says your Worship thinks you can make her into some sort of plaything.
"O monstrous arrogance! Thou liest, thou thread, thou thimble, Thou yard, three-quarters, half-yard, quarter, nail! Braved in mine own house with a skein of thread? Away, thou rag, thou quantity, thou remnant, Or I shall so be-mete thee with thy yard As thou shalt think on prating whilst thou liv’st!","What monstrous arrogance! It’s a lie, you thread, you thimble, you measurement! You flea, you louse, you winter cricket! Disrespected in my own house by a spool of thread! Get out of here you rag, you remnant, you piece of yardage, or I’ll measure you within an inch of your life with your own yardstick, and you’ll remember your yammering for the rest of your life. I tell you, you’ve ruined her gown."
Your Worship is deceived. The gown is made Just as my master had direction. Grumio gave order how it should be done.,It’s not true. The gown was made just as my master was directed. Grumio gave the order for how it should be done.
I gave him no order. I gave him the stuff.,I gave him no order. I gave him the material.
But how did you desire it should be made?,But how did you want it made?
"Marry, sir, with needle and thread.",With a needle and thread.
But did you not request to have it cut?,But didn’t you expect us to cut the cloth?
Thou hast faced many things.,"You’ve faced To face means to decorate with trim. faced many things, haven’t you?"
I have.,I have.
"Face not me. Thou hast braved many men; brave not me. I will neither be faced nor braved. I say unto thee, I bid thy master cutout the gown, but I did not bid him cut it to pieces. Ergo, thou liest.","Well, don’t face off with me. You have bested many things, well don’t try and best me. I will not be faced or bested. I tell you I requested that your master cut out the gown, but I didn’t ask him to cut it all to pieces. Therefore, it follows you’re a liar."
"Why, here is the note of the fashion to testify.","Why, here is the order to prove it."
Read it.,Read it.
"The note lies in ’s throat, if he say I said so.",The note is a big fat liar if it says I said so.
"(reads) “Imprimis, a loose-bodied gown—”","(reading) “Item one, a loose-bodied gown—”"
"Master, if ever I said “loose-bodied gown,” sew me in the skirts of it, and beat me to death with a bottom of brown thread. I said “a gown.”","Master, if ever I said “ 				 loose-bodied gown Grumio acts if “loose-bodied” meant intended for a loose woman loose-bodied gown ,” sew me into the skirts of it and beat me to death with a bobbin of brown thread. I said “a gown.”"
Proceed.,Go on.
(reads) “With a small-compassed cape—”,(he reads) “With a half-circle cape—”
I confess the cape.,I admit the cape.
(reads) “With a trunk sleeve—”,(he reads) “With a wide sleeve—”
I confess two sleeves.,I admit two sleeves.
(reads) “The sleeves curiously cut.”,(he reads) “The sleeves carefully cut.”
"Ay, there’s the villany.","Ah, there’s the problem."
"Error i' the bill, sir, error i' the bill! I commanded the sleeves should be cut out and sewed up again, and that I’ll prove upon thee, though thy little finger be armed in a thimble.","Error in the bill, sir, error in the bill! I ordered that the sleeves be cut out and sewed up again, and I’ll prove it in combat even if your little finger is armed with your thimble."
"This is true that I say: an I had thee in place where, thou shouldst know it.","What I say is true. And if this were a fitting place, I’d prove it."
"I am for thee straight. Take thou the bill, give me thy mete- yard, and spare not me.",I am ready for you. You take the bill and I’ll take your yardstick. Do your worst!
"God-a-mercy, Grumio! Then he shall have no odds.","God have mercy, Grumio! He won’t have a chance."
"Well, sir, in brief, the gown is not for me.","Well, sir, the gown is not for me."
"You are i' the right, sir, ’tis for my mistress.","You are right, it’s for my mistress."
"Go, take it up unto thy master’s use.","Go, take it away and let your master make whatever use of it he can."
"Villain, not for thy life! Take up my mistress' gown for thy master’s use!",Certainly not! Take off my mistress' gown for your master’s use!
"Why, sir, what’s your conceit in that?","Why, what’s the problem?"
"O, sir, the conceit is deeper than you think for. Take up my mistress' gown to his master’s use! O, fie, fie, fie!","Oh, sir, the problem goes far deeper than you realize. Take up my mistress' gown for his master’s use! Oh, that’s disgusting!"
"(to TAILOR) Go, take it hence. Begone, and say no more.","(speaking so that only HORTENSIO can hear) Hortensio, tell the tailor you’ll make sure he gets paid. (to TAILOR) Take it away. Off you go. There’s no more to be said."
"(aside to TAILOR) Tailor, I’ll pay thee for thy gown tomorrow. Take no unkindness of his hasty words.","(speaking so that only TAILOR can hear) Tailor, I’ll pay you for the gown tomorrow. Don’t be offended at his angry words. Go on, then. Regards to your master."
"Well, come, my Kate. We will unto your father’s Even in these honest mean habiliments. Our purses shall be proud, our garments poor, For ’tis the mind that makes the body rich, So honor peereth in the meanest habit. What, is the jay more precious than the lark Because his feathers are more beautiful? Or is the adder better than the eel","Ah well, my Kate. We’ll go to your father’s house dressed as we are, in simple but honest clothes. Our purses shall be rich, our garments poor. After all, it’s the mind that enriches the body, and just as the sun shines through the darkest clouds, well, that’s how clearly honor peeps through even the humblest style of dress. I mean, is the jay more precious than the lark because his feather is more beautiful? Is the snake better than the eel because the pattern on his back pleases the eye?"
"Oh, no, good Kate. Neither art thou the worse For this poor furniture and mean array. If thou account’st it shame, lay it on me, And therefore frolic! We will hence forthwith (to GRUMIO) Go, call my men, and let us straight to him, And bring our horses unto Long Lane end. There will we mount, and thither walk on foot. Let’s see, I think ’tis now some seven o'clock,","Hardly, Kate. By the same token you are worth no less for your simple clothes and lack of finery. If you regard it as shameful, put the shame on me. So, let’s perk up! We’re off to eat and whoop it up at your father’s house.(to GRUMIO) Go, call my men so we can leave right away. And bring our horses to the end of Long Lane. We’ll walk there on foot and mount up there. Let’s see, I think it must be seven o'clock, so we should get there easily by lunchtime."
"I dare assure you, sir, ’tis almost two, And ’twill be supper time ere you come there.","I hate to say it, but it’s almost two and we won’t get there before suppertime."
"It shall be seven ere I go to horse. Look what I speak, or do, or think to do, I will not go today, and ere I do It shall be what o'clock I say it is.","It shall be seven o'clock before I get on my horse. Whatever I say, or think, or do, you’re continually contradicting it. Sirs, never mind. We won’t go today—or any day until it’s clear that it shall be whatever time I say it is."
"(aside) Why, so this gallant will command the sun.",(to himself) I see this fellow intends to command the sun.
"(as LUCENTIO) Sir, this is the house. Please it you that I call?","(as LUCENTIO) Sir, this is the house. Would you like me to ring?"
"Ay, what else? and but I be deceived, Signior Baptista may remember me, Near twenty years ago, in Genoa,","Yes, certainly. Unless I am mistaken, Signior Baptista may remember me from the Pegasus in Genoa, where we both stayed twenty years ago."
"(as LUCENTIO) 'Tis well; and hold your own, in any case, With such austerity as 'longeth to a father.","(as LUCENTIO) Fine, fine. Just play your part and act as serious as a father should."
I warrant you.,Of course I will.
"But, sir, here comes your boy. 'Twere good he were schooled.","But, sir, here comes your servant. Better fill him in."
"Now do your duty throughly, I advise you. Imagine ’twere the right Vincentio.","(as LUCENTIO) Don’t worry about him.—You there, Biondello, now act your part convincingly. Behave as though this were the real Vincentio."
"Tut, fear not me.",Don’t worry about me.
(as LUCENTIO) But hast thou done thy errand to Baptista?,(as LUCENTIO) And did you take the message to Baptista?
And that you looked for him this day in Padua.,"I told him that your father was in Venice, and that you expected him to arrive in Padua today."
(as LUCENTIO) Thou'rt a tall fellow. Hold thee that to drink. Gives money,"(as LUCENTIO) Good lad! Here, buy yourself a drink on me. He gives BIONDELLO some money."
"Here comes Baptista. Set your countenance, sir.","Here comes Baptista. Places, everyone!"
"Sir, this is the gentleman I told you of. I pray you stand good father to me now. Give me Bianca for my patrimony.","Signior Baptista, I’m glad to see you.—Sir, this is the gentleman I told you of. I hope you’ll be a good father to me now. Give me Bianca for my inheritance."
"(as VINCENTIO) Soft son.— To gather in some debts, my son Lucentio Made me acquainted with a weighty cause Of love between your daughter and himself. And, for the good report I hear of you And she to him, to stay him not too long, I am content, in a good father’s care, To have him matched. And if you please to like No worse than I, upon some agreement With one consent to have her so bestowed, For curious I cannot be with you, Signior Baptista, of whom I hear so well.","(as VINCENTIO) Hush, son.—Sir, may I? Having come to Padua to collect some debts, my son Lucentio acquainted me with a serious matter, namely the love between your daughter and himself. Now, since I’ve heard good reports of you, and in view of the love between your daughter and my son, I’m willing to give my consent to his marriage right away. So, if you think you can put up with no worse a man than I am, you’ll find me willing, pending some agreement, to see your daughter betrothed to him. I can’t haggle with you, Signior Baptista. I have too much respect for you."
"Sir, pardon me in what I have to say. Right true it is your son Lucentio here Doth love my daughter and she loveth him, Or both dissemble deeply their affections. And therefore, if you say no more than this, And pass my daughter a sufficient dower, The match is made, and all is done. Your son shall have my daughter with consent.","Sir, pardon me for what I am about to say. I appreciate your frankness and your brevity. It’s true that your son Lucentio here loves my daughter, and she loves him—or else they’re putting on quite an act. Therefore, provided that you assure me that you will treat your son as a father should and offer my daughter a sufficient dowry, we’ll call it a match and be done with it. Your son will have my consent to marry my daughter."
(as LUCENTIO) We be affied and such assurance ta'en As shall with either part’s agreement stand?,"(as LUCENTIO) Thank you, sir. Where can we draw up the necessary papers and get this settled?"
"Not in my house, Lucentio, for you know Pitchers have ears, and I have many servants. And happily we might be interrupted.","Not in my house, Lucentio. My servants might overhear, and old Gremio is still hanging around, so we might be interrupted."
"(as LUCENTIO) Then at my lodging, an it like you. There doth my father lie, and there this night We’ll pass the business privately and well. My boy shall fetch the scrivener presently. The worst is this, that at so slender warning You are like to have a thin and slender pittance.","(as LUCENTIO) Then at my place, if you like. That’s where my father’s staying. We can get everything sorted out in private there tonight. Send your servant for Bianca. Mine shall go and fetch the notary. The only drawback is that, with such short notice, we’ll be able to offer you only modest refreshment."
"It likes me well.—Cambio, hie you home, And, if you will, tell what hath happenèd: Lucentio’s father is arrived in Padua, And how she’s like to be Lucentio’s wife.","This is all very acceptable.—Cambio, hurry home and tell Bianca to get ready right away and, if you don’t mind, tell her what’s happened: that Lucentio’s father has arrived in Padua, and that she’s likely to become Lucentio’s wife."
"I pray the gods she may, with all my heart!",I hope with all my heart she will!
"Signior Baptista, shall I lead the way? Welcome! One mess is like to be your cheer. Come, sir, we will better it in Pisa.","(as LUCENTIO) Forget about your heart and get busy.—Signior Baptista, shall I lead the way? You’ll be welcome, though dinner will probably be only one course. We’ll make it up to you in Pisa."
I follow you.,I’ll come with you.
Cambio.,Cambio.
"What sayest thou, Biondello?","What is it, Biondello?"
You saw my master wink and laugh upon you?,You saw my master wink and laugh at you?
"Biondello, what of that?",What about it?
"Faith, nothing; but 'has left me here behind to expound the meaning or moral of his signs and tokens.",Nothing. It’s just that he left me here behind to interpret his signs and signals.
"I pray thee, moralize them.","Please, educate me."
"Then thus: Baptista is safe, talking with the deceiving father of a deceitful son.",Here’s the deal: we’re safe on the Baptista front. He’s talking with the bogus father about the bogus son.
And what of him?,And so—?
His daughter is to be brought by you to the supper.,You are to bring his daughter to the supper.
And then?,And then?
The old priest at Saint Luke’s Church is at your command at all hours.,The old priest at Saint Luke’s Church is at your command at all hours.
And what of all this?,And what of all this?
"I cannot tell, except they are busied about a counterfeit assurance. Take you assurance of her cum privilegio ad imprimendum solum. To th' church take the priest, clerk, and some sufficient honest witnesses. If this be not that you look for, I have no more to say, But bid Bianca farewell forever and a day.","I don’t know, except they are busy with some phony guarantee. So go and put your stamp on the girl. Go to the church: take the priest, the clerk, and some reasonably honest witnesses. If this isn’t what you’ve been hoping for, I have no more to say except that you ought to say goodbye to Bianca forever."
"Hear’st thou, Biondello?","Listen, Biondello—"
"I cannot tarry. I knew a wench married in an afternoon as she went to the garden for parsley to stuff a rabbit, and so may you, sir. And so adieu, sir. My master hath appointed me to go to Saint Luke’s to bid the priest be ready to come against you come with your appendix.","I can’t stay. I knew a girl who was married in an afternoon as she went to the garden for parsley to stuff a rabbit. It could happen to you. Farewell, sir. My master has instructed me to go to Saint Luke’s to tell the priest to be ready in case you should show up with your better half."
"I may, and will, if she be so contented. She will be pleased. Then wherefore should I doubt? Hap what hap may, I’ll roundly go about her.","I may. I will if she likes the idea. She will be pleased. Then why am I worried? Oh well, whatever. I’ll ask her straight out. It will be hard if “Cambio” loses her."
"Come on, i' God’s name, once more toward our father’s. Good Lord, how bright and goodly shines the moon!","Come, let’s continue on toward your father’s house. Good Lord, how bright and splendid is the moon tonight!"
The moon? The sun! It is not moonlight now.,The moon? You mean the sun! It is not nighttime now.
I say it is the moon that shines so bright.,I say it’s the moon that shines so bright.
I know it is the sun that shines so bright.,I know it’s the sun that shines so bright.
"Now, by my mother’s son, and that’s myself, It shall be moon, or star, or what I list, Or e'er I journey to your father’s house. (to servants) Go on, and fetch our horses back again.—","Now, by my mother’s son, and that’s me, it will be moon or star or whatever I want before I’ll travel to your father’s house. (to servants) Go return our horses.— Constantly contradicted and contradicted, and nothing but contradicted!"
"(to KATHERINE) Say as he says, or we shall never go.",(to KATHERINE) Say what he wants or we’ll never go.
"Forward, I pray, since we have come so far, And be it moon, or sun, or what you please. An if you please to call it a rush candle,","Since we’ve come this far, please—let’s continue on. And whatever it is—moon or sun or anything you like—if you want to call it a tea candle, that’s what it is as far as I’m concerned. From now on, I promise."
I say it is the moon.,I say it’s the moon.
I know it is the moon.,I know it’s the moon.
"Nay, then you lie. It is the blessèd sun.","Well, you’re a liar, then. It’s the blessed sun."
"Then God be blessed, it is the blessèd sun. And the moon changes even as your mind. What you will have it named, even that it is, And so it shall be so for Katherine.","Then God be praised, it is the blessed sun. But it is not the sun when you say it is not, and the moon changes according to your mind. Whatever you want to call a thing, that’s what it is—and that’s what it will always be for me."
"Petruchio, go thy ways; the field is won.","Petruchio, do whatever you like. You’ve won."
"And not unluckily against the bias. But, soft! Company is coming here.","Well, onward, then. That’s how things should be—straight and smooth. But, hang on! I hear someone coming."
"(to VINCENTIO) Good morrow, gentle mistress, where away?— Hast thou beheld a fresher gentlewoman? Such war of white and red within her cheeks! What stars do spangle heaven with such beauty As those two eyes become that heavenly face?— Sweet Kate, embrace her for her beauty’s sake.","(to VINCENTIO) Good morning, young miss, where are you going?—Tell me, sweet Kate, and tell me truly, have you ever seen a young gentlewoman blooming more with health? The way the shades of white and red compete in her complexion. Which of the stars in heaven shine with such beauty as the two eyes that sparkle in that heavenly face? Fair lovely maid, once more good day to you.—Sweet Kate, embrace her for her beauty."
"(aside) He will make the man mad, to make a woman of him.",(speaking so that only the audience can hear) He will drive the man mad pretending he thinks he’s a woman.
"Young budding virgin, fair and fresh and sweet, Whither away, or where is thy abode? Happier the man whom favorable stars Allot thee for his lovely bedfellow!","Young budding virgin, fair and pure and sweet, where are you off to? Or where do you live? Your parents are lucky to have such a lovely child. And luckier still is the man who gets to be your husband and share your bed."
"Why, how now, Kate! I hope thou art not mad. This is a man—old, wrinkled, faded, withered—","Why, dear me, Kate! I hope you haven’t lost your mind. This is not a maiden, as you say, but an old man—wrinkled, faded, and withered."
"Pardon, old father, my mistaking eyes That have been so bedazzled with the sun That everything I look on seemeth green. Now I perceive thou art a reverend father.","Sir, pardon my imperfect eyes, which have been so blinded by the sun that everything I look at appears green “Green” here means “young.”. green . Now I can see that you’re an elderly gentleman. Do forgive me for my crazy error."
"Do, good old grandsire, and withal make known Which way thou travellest. If along with us, We shall be joyful of thy company.","Do, good old grandfather, and while you’re at it, tell us which way you’re traveling. If we’re all headed in the same direction, we’d love your company."
"Fair sir, and you, my merry mistress, My name is called Vincentio, my dwelling Pisa, And bound I am to Padua, there to visit A son of mine which long I have not seen.","Well, sir, and you, witty lady, who gave me quite a turn with your strange talk, my name is Vincentio, my hometown Pisa, and I am traveling to Padua to visit a son of mine whom I haven’t seen in a long while."
What is his name?,What is his name?
"Lucentio, gentle sir.","Lucentio, sir."
"Happily met, the happier for thy son. And now by law as well as reverend age, I may entitle thee my loving father. The sister to my wife, this gentlewoman, Nor be grieved. She is of good esteem, Her dowry wealthy, and of worthy birth. Beside, so qualified as may beseem The spouse of any noble gentleman.","A fortunate coincidence—more fortunate for your son. I can now call you “father” in a legal sense, not just out of respect for your age. The sister of my wife, this lady here, is married to your son. And there’s no need for wonder or worry. His bride is well thought of, with a rich dowry and noble birth—a fit wife for any nobleman."
"And wander we to see thy honest son, Who will of thy arrival be full joyous.","Let me embrace the father of Lucentio, and then we’ll journey on to see your son, who will rejoice at your arrival."
"But is this true, or is it else your pleasure, Like pleasant travelers, to break a jest",Is all this true? Or is this your way of livening up your travels—playing jokes on people you meet on the way?
"I do assure thee, father, so it is.","I assure you, sir, it’s true."
"Come, go along and see the truth hereof, For our first merriment hath made thee jealous.","Look, come along with us and see the truth for yourself. Our earlier joke has made you understandably suspicious."
"Well, Petruchio, this has put me in heart. Then hast thou taught Hortensio to be untoward.","Well, Petruchio, all this is very encouraging. I’ll visit my widow now, and if she proves difficult to manage, I’ll know how to make myself impossible."
"Softly and swiftly, sir, for the priest is ready.","Quickly and quietly, sir. The priest is already there."
"I fly, Biondello. But they may chance to need thee at home. Therefore leave us.","We’re off, Biondello. But they may need you at home, so you go on back."
"Nay, faith, I’ll see the church a' your back, and then come back to my master’s as soon as I can.",I’ll see them safely married first and then hurry back to my master’s.
I marvel Cambio comes not all this while.,I wonder why Cambio hasn’t shown up in all this time.
"Sir, here’s the door. This is Lucentio’s house. My father’s bears more toward the marketplace. Thither must I, and here I leave you, sir.","Here is the door, sir. This is Lucentio’s house. My father-in-law lives closer to the marketplace. That’s where I’m going now, so I’ll leave you here."
"You shall not choose but drink before you go. And, by all likelihood, some cheer is toward.","You must not go without having a drink first. I think I may presume to welcome you, and they’re probably preparing some kind of feast to welcome me."
They’re busy within. You were best knock louder.,They’re pretty busy in there. You’d better knock louder.
(as VINCENTIO) What’s he that knocks as he would beat down the gate?,(as VINCENTIO) Who’s that breaking down the door?
"Is Signior Lucentio within, sir?","Is Signior Lucentio at home, sir?"
"(as VINCENTIO) He’s within, sir, but not to be spoken withal.","(as VINCENTIO) Yes, he’s at home, but he can’t be disturbed."
What if a man bring him a hundred pound or two to make merry withal?,What if a fellow were bringing him a couple of hundred pounds to toss around?
(as VINCENTIO) Keep your hundred pounds to yourself. He shall need none so long as I live.,(as VINCENTIO) Keep your hundreds. He won’t need them as long as I’m living.
"(to VINCENTIO) Nay, I told you your son was well beloved in Padua.—Do you hear, sir? To leave frivolous circumstances, I pray you tell Signior Lucentio that his father is come from Pisa and is here at the door to speak with him.","(to VINCENTIO) I told you your son was popular in Padua. Hear that, sir? (to MERCHANT) Games aside, though, would you be good enough to tell Signior Lucentio that his father has arrived from Pisa and stands at the door waiting to speak with him?"
(as VINCENTIO) Thou liest. His father is come from Padua and here looking out at the window.,"(as VINCENTIO) You lie. His father is already in Padua. In fact, he’s standing right here looking out the window."
Art thou his father?,You’re his father?
"(as VINCENTIO) Ay, sir, so his mother says, if I may believe her.","(as VINCENTIO) Yes, sir—according to his mother, if I can believe her."
"(to VINCENTIO) Why, how now, gentleman! Why, this is flat knavery to take upon you another man’s name.",(to VINCENTIO) What? Why this is out and out robbery! To appropriate another man’s name.
(as VINCENTIO) Lay hands on the villain. I believe he means to cozen somebody in this city under my countenance.,(as VINCENTIO) Arrest the wretch. I think he means to bamboozle someone in this city while pretending to be me.
'em good shipping! But who is here? Mine old master Vincentio! Now we are undone and brought to nothing.,"(to himself) Well, I’ve seen them married. Good luck to them! Uh-oh. What’s this? It’s my master’s father, Vincentio! Now we’re in trouble. Everything’s ruined."
"(to BIONDELLO) Come hither, crack-hemp.","(to BIONDELLO) Come here, you scoundrel."
"Hope I may choose, sir.","I believe I have some choice in the matter, sir."
"Come hither, you rogue! What, have you forgot me?","Come here, you wretch! What, have you forgotten me?"
"Forgot you! No, sir. I could not forget you, for I never saw you before in all my life.","Forgotten you! No, sir. I could not forget you, since I never saw you before in my life."
"What, you notorious villain, didst thou never see thy master’s father, Vincentio?","Despicable brute! Never seen your master’s father, Vincentio?"
"What, my old worshipful old master? Yes, marry, sir. See where he looks out of the window.","My honorable, reverend master? Yes, of course. There he is at the window."
"Is ’t so, indeed.",Is that so?
"Help, help, help! Here’s a madman will murder me.","Help, help, help! This madman will murder me."
"(as VINCENTIO) Help, son! Help, Signior Baptista!","(as VINCENTIO) Help, son! Help, Signior Baptista!"
"Prithee, Kate, let’s stand aside and see the end of this controversy.","What do you think, Kate, shall we hang back and see how this conflict finishes?"
"(as LUCENTIO) Sir, what are you that offer to beat my servant?","(as LUCENTIO) How dare you beat my servant, sir?"
"What am I, sir! Nay, what are you, sir? O immortal gods! O fine villain! A silken doublet, a velvet hose, a scarlet cloak, and a copatain hat! Oh, I am undone, I am undone! While I play the good husband at home, my son and my servant spend all at the university.","How dare I? How dare you, sir? Oh, cruel gods! Oh, clever villain! A silk doublet, velvet hose, a scarlet cloak, and a high-brimmed hat! Oh, I am destroyed, I am destroyed! While I sat counting my pennies at home, my son and my servant have squandered all my money at the university."
"(as LUCENTIO) How now, what’s the matter?","(as LUCENTIO) Heavens, what’s the matter?"
"What, is the man lunatic?","What, is the man crazy?"
"(as LUCENTIO) Sir, you seem a sober ancient gentleman by your habit, but your words show you a madman. Why, sir, what 'cerns it you if I wear pearl and gold? I thank my good father I am able to maintain it.","(as LUCENTIO) Sir, you seem from your clothes to be a sober, respectable old gentleman, but your words show you to be a madman. What do you care if I wear pearls and gold? Thanks to my father, I can afford to."
Thy father! O villain! He is a sailmaker in Bergamo.,"Your father! Why, you scoundrel! Your father is a sailmaker in Bergamo."
"You mistake, sir, you mistake, sir. Pray, what do you think is his name?","You’re wrong, sir, very wrong. Why, what do you imagine his name to be?"
"His name! As if I knew not his name! I have brought him up ever since he was three years old, and his name is Tranio.","His name! As if I wouldn’t know his name, I who brought him up ever since he was three years old. His name is Tranio."
"(as VINCENTIO) Away, away, mad ass! His name is Lucentio and he is mine only son, and heir to the lands of me, Signior Vincentio.","(as VINCENTIO) Get rid of this mad fool! This is Lucentio, my only son and heir to all my lands."
"Lucentio! Oh, he hath murdered his master! Lay hold on him, I charge you in the Duke’s name. O my son, my son! Tell me, thou villain, where is my son Lucentio?","Lucentio! Oh God, he’s murdered his master! Restrain him! I charge you in the Duke’s name. Oh, my son, my son! Tell me, you monster, where is my son Lucentio?"
(as LUCENTIO) Call forth an officer.,(as LUCENTIO) Call forth an officer.
"Carry this mad knave to the jail.—Father Baptista, I charge you see that he be forthcoming.","Take this mad wretch to jail.—Father-in-law Baptista, will you see that he’s available to appear in court?"
Carry me to the jail?,Take me off to jail?
"Stay, officer. He shall not go to prison.","Wait, officer. He mustn’t go to prison."
"Talk not, Signior Gremio. I say he shall go to prison.","Be quiet, Signior Gremio. I say he shall go to prison."
"Take heed, Signior Baptista, lest you be cony-catched in this business. I dare swear this is the right Vincentio.","Be careful, Signior Baptista, lest you be made the dupe in this business. I could swear this is the real Vincentio."
"(as VINCENTIO) Swear, if thou darest.",(as VINCENTIO) Can you swear to it?
"Nay, I dare not swear it.","Well, no, not literally."
Lucentio.,(as LUCENTIO) Then you’d better say that I’m not Lucentio.
"Yes, I know thee to be Signior Lucentio.","No, I know that you’re Signior Lucentio."
Away with the dotard! To the jail with him!,Away with the doddering fool! Take him off to jail!
Thus strangers may be haled and abused.—O monstrous villain!,Is this how strangers are treated here? You harass and abuse them?—This is unbelievable!
"O! We are spoiled and yonder he is! Deny him, forswear him, or else we are all undone.",We’re ruined! There he is! Renounce him! Deny you know him or we’re sunk.
"Pardon, sweet father.","Pardon, dear father."
Lives my sweet son?,"Dear son, you’re alive!"
"Pardon, dear father.","Pardon us, dear father."
How hast thou offended? Where is Lucentio?,Why? What have you done? Where is Lucentio?
"Here’s Lucentio, right son to the right Vincentio, That have by marriage made thy daughter mine While counterfeit supposes bleared thine eyne.","Here is Lucentio, true son to the true Vincentio. I have made your daughter mine by marriage while false impressions blinded your eyes."
"Here’s packing, with a witness, to deceive us all!",Quite the conspiracy! We’ve all been duped.
"Where is that damnèd villain, Tranio, That faced and braved me in this matter so?","Where is that damned wretch, Tranio, who defied me in such a disgraceful manner?"
"Why, tell me, is not this my Cambio?","Say, isn’t this the Latin master Cambio?"
Cambio is changed into Lucentio.,Cambio is transformed into Lucentio.
"Made me exchange my state with Tranio, While he did bear my countenance in the town, And happily I have arrivèd at the last Unto the wishèd haven of my bliss. Then pardon him, sweet father, for my sake.","It was love that performed these miracles. Bianca’s love made me trade places with Tranio while he masqueraded as me around town. And now, finally, I’ve arrived happily at the blissful haven where I longed to be. What Tranio did, he did at my command. So pardon him, dear father, for my sake."
I’ll slit the villain’s nose that would have sent me to the jail.,"No, I’ll slit the nose of the villain who would have sent me to jail."
"But do you hear, sir, have you married my daughter without asking my goodwill?","But sir, have you married my daughter without my consent?"
"Fear not, Baptista, we will content you. Go to. But I will in to be revenged for this villany.","Don’t worry, Baptista, you’ll be perfectly satisfied. You’ll see. Now I’m going inside to see that someone pays for this mischief."
"And I, to sound the depth of this knavery.",Me too—to see how far the mischief went.
"Look not pale, Bianca. Thy father will not frown.","Don’t worry, Bianca. Your father won’t be angry."
"My cake is dough, but I’ll in among the rest,","So much for my hopes! Well, I’ll go in and join the others. All I can hope for now is a share of the feast."
"Husband, let’s follow to see the end of this ado.",Let’s follow them to see how this turns out.
"First kiss me, Kate, and we will.","First kiss me, Kate, and then we will."
"What, in the midst of the street?","What, here in the middle of the street?"
"What, art thou ashamed of me?",Why not? Are you ashamed of me?
"No, sir, God forbid, but ashamed to kiss.","Certainly not! But I’m ashamed to kiss, sir."
"Why, then let’s home again. (to GRUMIO) Come, sirrah, let’s away.","All right then, back home we go. (to GRUMIO) Come, fellow, let’s be off."
"Nay, I will give thee a kiss. (kisses him) Now pray thee, love, stay.","No, wait. I will kiss you. (kisses him) Now please, love, stay."
"Better once than never, for never too late.","Isn’t this good? Come, my sweet Kate. Better late than never—and it’s never too late to change."
"At last, though long, our jarring notes agree, And time it is when raging war is done To smile at ’scapes and perils overblown. My fair Bianca, bid my father welcome, Brother Petruchio, sister Katherina, And thou, Hortensio, with thy loving widow, Feast with the best, and welcome to my house. My banquet is to close our stomachs up, For now we sit to chat as well as eat.","Finally, at long last, we’ve reconciled our differences. Now is the time—when war is safely over—to laugh at past dangers and adventures. My fair Bianca, bid my father welcome, while I with equal affection welcome yours. Brother Petruchio, sister Katherina, and you, Hortensio, with your loving widow, you’ll find no better entertainment anywhere. All of you are welcome in my house. This last course here is for closing up the stomach after great feasting. Now everyone be seated, as this is the part where we sit and chat as well as eat."
"Nothing but sit and sit, and eat and eat!",All we do is sit and sit and eat and eat.
"Padua affords this kindness, son Petruchio.","Yes, Padua is famous for this pleasant life, Petruchio, my son."
Padua affords nothing but what is kind.,Padua contains nothing that isn’t pleasant.
"For both our sakes, I would that word were true.",I wish that were true for both our sakes!
"Now, for my life, Hortensio fears his widow.","Well what do you know! Hortensio fears “Fears” here can mean both“is afraid of,” which is how Petruchio means it, and “frightens,” which is how the widow takes it. fears his widow."
Then never trust me if I be afeard.,Me afraid of him? I don’t think so.
"You are very sensible, and yet you miss my sense: I mean, Hortensio is afeard of you.","That’s very sensible, but you missed my sense: I meant Hortensio is afraid of you."
He that is giddy thinks the world turns round.,He who is dizzy thinks the world is spinning.
Roundly replied.,A very candid reply.
"Mistress, how mean you that?",What’s that supposed to mean?
Thus I conceive by him.,That’s what I conceive of him.
Conceives by me? How likes Hortensio that?,"Conceives by me “Conceives by me” = becomes pregnant by me. Conceives by me ? How does that sit with you, Hortensio?"
"My widow says, thus she conceives her tale. “That’s what I understand him to mean.”",My widow means that her remark expressed the way she understood him.
"Very well mended. Kiss him for that, good widow.","Nice save! Kiss him for that, good widow."
"“He that is giddy thinks the world turns round”— I pray you, tell me what you meant by that.","“He who is dizzy thinks the world is spinning”—please, tell me what you meant by that."
Your husband being troubled with a shrew And now you know my meaning.,"Your husband, being saddled with a shrew, projects his own suffering onto my husband. And now you know my meaning."
A very mean meaning.,A very nasty meaning.
"Right, I mean you.","My meaning is nasty, for it’s you I mean."
"And I am mean indeed, respecting you.",And I am nasty when it comes to you.
"To her, Kate!","You tell her, Kate!"
"To her, widow!","You tell her, widow!"
"A hundred marks, my Kate does put her down.","I’ll bet you a hundred marks, my Kate puts her flat on her back."
That’s my office.,"Well, that’s really my job."
"Spoke like an officer! Ha' to thee, lad!",Well said! Here’s to you!
How likes Gremio these quick-witted folks?,"What do you think of these quick-witted folks, Gremio?"
"Believe me, sir, they butt together well.",They certainly do like to butt heads!
Head and butt! An hasty-witted body Would say your head and butt were head and horn.,A clever person would say their butting heads had horns Men whose wives cheat on them were supposed to have horns. horns on them.
"Ay, mistress bride, hath that awakened you?","Ah, our bride has woken up!"
"Ay, but not frighted me. Therefore I’ll sleep again.","Yes, but not out of fear. I’ll go back to sleep now."
Have at you for a bitter jest or two!,"No, you shall not. Since you chimed in, let’s see if we can trade a caustic joke or two."
"Am I your bird? I mean to shift my bush, And then pursue me as you draw your bow.— You are welcome all.","Am I the bird you’re going to shoot at now? I’ll move my bush “Move my bush” = move to another bush (also with a sexual double entendre). move my bush , so you’ll have to aim at a moving target. Thank you all for coming."
"This bird you aimed at, though you hit her not.— Therefore a health to all that shot and missed.","Well, she got away. Signior Tranio, you also took aim at that bird, though you didn’t hit her.—So here’s a health to all who’ve shot and missed."
"Oh, sir, Lucentio slipped me like his greyhound, Which runs himself and catches for his master.","Oh well, sir, I was really just like a greyhound that Lucentio let off the leash: I did the running, but the catch was his."
"A good swift simile, but something currish.",A witty if a cynical reply.
"'Tis well, sir, that you hunted for yourself. 'Tis thought your deer does hold you at a bay.","It’s good you hunted for yourself, sir. It’s rumored that your deer holds you at bay When a deer turns and faces the pursuing hounds, it is said to be “at bay.” bay ."
"Oh, Oh, Petruchio! Tranio hits you now.","Oh-ho, Petruchio! Tranio got you that time."
"I thank thee for that gird, good Tranio.","I thank you for that quip, good Tranio."
"Confess, confess, hath he not hit you here?","Fess up, fess up, didn’t that one strike home?"
"He has a little galled me, I confess. And, as the jest did glance away from me, 'Tis ten to one it maimed you two outright.","He’s made me a little sore, I’ll admit. But since the gibe glanced off me, ten to one it hit you both straight on."
"Now, in good sadness, son Petruchio,","Seriously, though, son Petruchio, I think you have the most thoroughgoing shrew of us all."
"Well, I say no. And therefore, for assurance, Let’s each one send unto his wife; And he whose wife is most obedient To come at first when he doth send for her,","Well, I disagree. But why not put it to the test? Let’s each one send for his wife. Whichever’s is most obedient and comes most readily shall win the bet that we’ll propose."
Content. What’s the wager?,Agreed. What’s the bet?
Twenty crowns.,Twenty crowns.
"Twenty crowns? I’ll venture so much of my hawk or hound,",Twenty crowns? That’s a bet I’d make on my hawk or my hound. I’d wager twenty times as much on my wife.
A hundred then.,A hundred then.
Content.,Agreed.
A match! 'Tis done.,Good! It’s a bet.
Who shall begin?,Who should begin?
"Go, Biondello, bid your mistress come to me.","I will. Biondello, go and tell your mistress to come to me."
I go.,Here I go.
"Son, I’ll be your half Bianca comes.","Son, I’ll stake you half that Bianca comes."
I’ll have no halves. I’ll bear it all myself.,I’ll have no halves. I’ll shoulder the whole bet
"How now, what news?","Well, what happened"
"Sir, my mistress sends you word That she is busy, and she cannot come.","Sir, my mistress sends you word that she is busy and cannot come."
"How! “She’s busy, and she cannot come!” Is that an answer?",What! “She’s busy and cannot come!” Is that an answer?
"Pray God, sir, your wife send you not a worse.","Yes, and a nice one at that. Pray God your wife doesn’t send you a worse one."
I hope better.,I’m hoping for better.
"Sirrah Biondello, go and entreat my wife To come to me forthwith.","You there, Biondello, go and request that my wife come to me straight away."
"Nay, then she must needs come.","Oh-ho, he requests! Why, then she’ll have to come."
"I am afraid, sir, Do what you can, yours will not be entreated.","I rather think, sir, that yours will not grant a request in any case."
"Now, where’s my wife?","So, where’s my wife?"
She will not come. She bids you come to her.,She says she thinks this is a prank. She will not come. She says that you should come to her.
"Worse and worse. She will not come! O vile, intolerable, not to be endured!— Sirrah Grumio, go to your mistress,","Worse and worse! She will not come! It’s vile, intolerable, not to be endured!—You there, Grumio, go to your mistress. Say that I command her to come to me."
I know her answer.,I can guess her answer.
What?,What?
She will not.,She will not.
"The fouler fortune mine, and there an end.","The worse for me, no doubt about it."
"Now, by my holidam, here comes Katherina!","By all that’s holy, here comes Katherina!"
"What is your will, sir, that you send for me?","You sent for me, sir? Is there something you’d like me to do for you?"
"Where is your sister, and Hortensio’s wife?",Where are your sister and Hortensio’s wife?
They sit conferring by the parlor fire.,They sit chatting by the parlor fire.
"Go fetch them hither. If they deny to come, Swinge me them soundly forth unto their husbands. Away, I say, and bring them hither straight.","Go bring them here. If they refuse to come, get physical—use a whip if you have to, but get them out here to their husbands. Go on, I said. Bring them here straight away."
"Here is a wonder, if you talk of a wonder.","This is a miracle, if you talk of miracles."
And so it is. I wonder what it bodes.,It is. I wonder what it means.
"Marry, peace it bodes, and love, and quiet life, And awful rule, and right supremacy, And, to be short, what not that’s sweet and happy?","I’ll tell you what it means. It means peace and love and a quiet life, supremacy based on reverence and profound respect, and—not to go on and on about it—everything that’s sweet and happy."
"The wager thou hast won, and I will add Unto their losses twenty thousand crowns, Another dowry to another daughter, For she is changed as she had never been.","May good fortune come to you, good Petruchio! You’ve won the wager, and I will add twenty thousand crowns to what they owe you. Another dowry for another wife, for, truly, she is so transformed she’s like a completely new woman."
"And show more sign of her obedience, Her new-built virtue and obedience.","Wait, I will win the wager more spectacularly, going even further to demonstrate her obedience, her newly created virtue and obedience."
"See where she comes and brings your froward wives As prisoners to her womanly persuasion.— Off with that bauble, throw it underfoot.","Look, here she comes, with your ungovernable wives in tow, like prisoners of her womanly persuasion.—Katherine, that cap of yours doesn’t look good on you. Take it off and throw it on the ground."
"Lord, let me never have a cause to sigh, Till I be brought to such a silly pass!","Lord, may I never see a day of trouble until the day I let someone treat me like that."
Fie! What a foolish duty call you this?,For shame! What kind of loyalty is this?
"The wisdom of your duty, fair Bianca, Hath cost me an hundred crowns since suppertime.","I wish your loyalty were as foolish. The wisdom of your loyalty, fair Bianca, has cost me a hundred crowns since dinner."
The more fool you for laying on my duty.,The more fool you for betting on my loyalty.
"Katherine, I charge thee, tell these headstrong women","Katherine, I’d like you to lecture these headstrong women on the nature of the loyalty they owe their lords and husbands."
"Come, come, you’re mocking. We will have no telling.",You must be joking. There will be no lecture.
"Come on, I say, and first begin with her.","Do it, I say. You can begin with her."
She shall not.,She shall not.
I say she shall.—And first begin with her.,I say she shall.—And first begin with her.
"And dart not scornful glances from those eyes To wound thy lord, thy king, thy governor. It blots thy beauty as frosts do bite the meads, Confounds thy fame as whirlwinds shake fair buds, A woman moved is like a fountain troubled, Muddy, ill-seeming, thick, bereft of beauty, And while it is so, none so dry or thirsty Will deign to sip or touch one drop of it. Thy head, thy sovereign, one that cares for thee, And for thy maintenance commits his body To painful labor both by sea and land, To watch the night in storms, the day in cold, And craves no other tribute at thy hands But love, fair looks and true obedience— Too little payment for so great a debt. Such duty as the subject owes the prince, And when she is froward, peevish, sullen, sour, And not obedient to his honest will, What is she but a foul contending rebel And graceless traitor to her loving lord? To offer war where they should kneel for peace; Or seek for rule, supremacy and sway When they are bound to serve, love, and obey. Why are our bodies soft and weak and smooth, But that our soft conditions and our hearts Should well agree with our external parts? Come, come, you froward and unable worms!","Girls, girls! Wipe those frowns off your faces and stop rolling your eyes. This disrespectful stance toward the man who is your lord, your king, your governor tarnishes your beauty the way the frosts of winter blights the land. It mars your reputations as whirlwinds shake fair buds. And in no sense is it fitting or attractive. An angry woman is like an agitated fountain—muddy, unpleasant, lacking in beauty. And in this condition, no one—however dry or thirsty he may be—will stoop to sip or touch one drop of it. Your husband is your lord, your life, your keeper, your head, your sovereign, one who cares for you and who, for your ease and comfort, commits his body to harsh labor both on land and sea. Long, stormy nights at seas he stays awake, by day he endures cold while you lie safe and warm, secure in your beds at home. And in exchange he seeks no more from you but love, kind looks, and true obedience—too little payment for so great a debt. A woman owes her husband the same loyalty a subject owes his king. And when she is peevish and perverse, sullen, sour, and disobedient to his honest wishes, what is she but a loathsome, warlike rebel and an ungrateful traitor to her loving lord? I am ashamed that women are so foolish as to declare war when they should plead on their knees for peace, that they seek authority, supremacy, and power when they are under an obligation to serve, love, and obey. Why are our bodies soft and weak and smooth, unfit for toil and trouble in the world, if not so that our soft qualities and our hearts should agree with our external parts? Come, come, you weak, ungovernable worms!"
"My mind hath been as big as one of yours, To bandy word for word and frown for frown. But now I see our lances are but straws, Our strength as weak, our weakness past compare, That seeming to be most which we indeed least are. And place your hands below your husband’s foot: In token of which duty, if he please, My hand is ready, may it do him ease.","My spirit has been as proud as each of yours, my courage as great, and my reason perhaps even better suited to bandy words back and forth and exchange frown for frown. But now I see our weapons are like straws, our strength like a straw’s weakness, and our weakness past comparison, so that we seem to be the thing we most are not. Humble your pride, then, since it’s useless, and place your hand beneath your husband’s foot. As a gesture of my loyalty, my hand is ready if he cares to use it. May it bring him comfort."
"Why, there’s a wench! Come on and kiss me, Kate.","There, that’s my girl! Come on and kiss me, Kate."
"Well, go thy ways, old lad, for thou shalt ha ’t.","Congratulations, old pal, you’ve won the bet."
'Tis a good hearing when children are toward.,It’s nice to see children playing well together.
But a harsh hearing when women are froward.,But not so nice when women misbehave.
"(to LUCENTIO) Come, Kate, we’ll to bed. 'Twas I won the wager, though you hit the white, And, being a winner, God give you good night!","Come, Kate, let’s go to bed. We three are married, but you two are defeated. (to LUCENTIO) I was the one who won the wager, though you hit the white Petruchio means the white circle at the center of an archery target, with a pun on Bianca’s name, which means white. hit the white . And as the winner here I say good night."
"Now, go thy ways, thou hast tamed a curst shrew.","Well, congratulations. You’ve tamed a terrible shrew."
"'Tis a wonder, by your leave, she will be tamed so.","It’s amazing, if I may say so, that she let herself be tamed."
