Boatswain!,Boatswain!
"Here, master. What cheer?","I’m here, sir. How can I help you?"
"Good, speak to th' mariners. Fall to ’t yarely, or we run ourselves aground. Bestir, bestir.","My good boy, give the other sailors a pep talk—and do it fast, before we’re shipwrecked. Hurry, hurry!"
"Heigh, my hearts! Cheerly, cheerly, my hearts! Yare! Yare!","Come on, men! That’s the way to do it! Quickly! Quickly! Take in the upper sail. Listen to the master’s orders. —Blow your heart out, storm! So long as we have enough room to avoid running aground!"
"Good Boatswain, have care. Where’s the Master? Play the men.","Be careful, good Boatswain! Where’s the Master? Make these men work."
"I pray now, keep below.","Please stay below deck, sir."
"Where is the Master, Boatswain?","Where’s the Master, Boatswain?"
You do assist the storm.,"He’s busy, can’t you hear him giving orders? You’re getting in the way of our work. Stay in your cabins. You’re helping the storm, not us."
"Nay, good, be patient.","Don’t get wound up, my good man."
"When the sea is. Hence! What cares these roarers for the name of king? To cabin, silence! Trouble us not.",I’m only wound up because the sea’s wound up. Now get out of here! Do you think these waves care anything about kings and officials? Go to your cabins and be quiet! Don’t bother us up here.
"Good, yet remember whom thou hast aboard.","Just remember who you’ve got on board with you, good man."
"None that I more love than myself. You are a councilor. If you can command these elements to silence and work the peace of the present, we will not hand a rope more. Use your authority. If you cannot, give thanks you have lived so long and make yourself ready in your cabin for the mischance of the hour, if it so hap.—Cheerly, good hearts!—Out of our way, I say.","Nobody I care about more than myself. You’re a king’s advisor. If you can order the storm to calm down, we can all put down our ropes and rest. Go ahead, use your authority. If you can’t do it, be grateful you’ve lived this long and go wait to die in your cabin, if it comes to that.—Harder, men!—Now get out of our way, I’m telling you."
"I have great comfort from this fellow. Methinks he hath no drowning mark upon him. His complexion is perfect gallows. Stand fast, good Fate, to his hanging. Make the rope of his destiny our cable, for our own doth little advantage. If he be not born to be hanged, our case is miserable.","I feel a lot better after talking to this guy. He doesn’t look like a person who would drown—he looks like he was born to be hanged Gonzalo implies that the Boatswain looks and acts like a dangerous criminal. hanged . I hope he lives long enough to be hanged. The rope that hangs him will do more good than all the ropes on this ship, since it’ll guarantee he stays alive through this storm. But if he’s not destined to die by hanging, then our chances don’t look too good."
"Down with the topmast! Yare, lower, lower! Bring her to try wi' th' main course.","Bring down that top sail! Fast! Lower, lower! Let the ship sail close to the wind."
A plague upon this howling! They are louder than the weather or our office.,Damn those men shouting down there! They’re louder than the storm or us sailors.
Yet again? What do you here? Shall we give o'er and drown?,"Oh, not you again. What do you want? Should we all give up and drown? Do you want to sink?"
"A pox o' your throat, you bawling, blasphemous, incharitable dog!","Oh, go to hell, you loud-mouthed bastard!"
"Work you, then.","Well, get to work, then."
"Hang, cur! Hang, you whoreson insolent noisemaker! We are less afraid to be drowned than thou art.","Just die, you lowlife! Go ahead and die, you nasty, rude bastard!You’re more scared of drowning than we are."
I’ll warrant him for drowning though the ship were no stronger than a nutshell and as leaky as an unstanched wench.,"Yes, I guarantee he won’t drown—even if this ship were as fragile as an eggshell and as leaky as a menstruating woman."
Lay her off!,Turn the ship to the wind! Set the sails and let her go out to sea again!
"All lost! To prayers, to prayers, all lost!",It’s no use! Pray for your lives! We’re done for!
"What, must our mouths be cold?","What, we’re going to die?"
"The king and prince at prayers. Let’s assist them, for our case is as theirs.","The king and the prince are praying. Let’s go join them, since whatever happens to them happens to us too."
I’m out of patience.,I’m out of patience.
We are merely cheated of our lives by drunkards. This wide-chopped rascal—would thou mightst lie drowning the washing of ten tides!,"Yes, we’ve been cheated out of our lives by a bunch of drunken, incompetent sailors. This bigmouth jerk here—(to BOATSWAIN) I hope you drown ten times over!"
"He’ll be hanged yet, though every drop of water swear against it and gape at widest to glut him.","He’ll still die by hanging, not drowning, even if every drop of water in the sea tries to swallow him."
"(within) Mercy on us!—We split, we split!—Farewell, my wife and children!—Farewell, brother!—We split, we split, we split!","God have mercy on us!—The ship’s breaking up!—Goodbye, wife and kids!—Goodbye, brother!—We’re breaking up, we’re breaking up!"
Let’s all sink wi' th' king.,Let’s all sink with the king.
Let’s take leave of him.,Let’s say goodbye to him.
"Now would I give a thousand furlongs of sea for an acre of barren ground: long heath, brown furze, anything. The wills above be done, but I would fain die a dry death.","Right now I’d give a thousand furlongs furlong = yards furlongs of sea for one little acre of dry ground: barren weed patch, anything at all. What’s destined to happen will happen, but I’d give anything to be dry when I die."
"If by your art, my dearest father, you have Put the wild waters in this roar, allay them. The sky, it seems, would pour down stinking pitch, But that the sea, mounting to th' welkin’s cheek, With those that I saw suffer. A brave vessel Who had, no doubt, some noble creature in her Dashed all to pieces. Oh, the cry did knock Against my very heart! Poor souls, they perished. Have sunk the sea within the earth or ere It should the good ship so have swallowed and The fraughting souls within her.","Dear father, if you caused this terrible storm with your magic powers, please put an end to it. The sky’s so dark it looks like it would rain down boiling hot tar if the sea weren’t swelling up to the sky to put its fire out. Oh, I suffered along with all the men I watched suffer! A fine ship, with some good people in it, I’m sure, smashed to pieces. Their dying shouts broke my heart! The poor people died. If I’d been a god I would’ve let the sea sink inside the earth before it had a chance to swallow up that ship and all the people it was carrying."
Be collected. No more amazement. Tell your piteous heart,Calm down. There’s nothing to get upset about. No harm was done.
"Oh, woe the day!","Oh, what a horrible day!"
"No harm. I have done nothing but in care of thee, Of thee, my dear one—thee my daughter, who Art ignorant of what thou art, naught knowing Of whence I am, nor that I am more better And thy no greater father.","There was no harm, I’m telling you. Everything I’ve done has been for you, my dear daughter. You don’t know what you are, since you don’t know who I am or where I come from, or that I’m better than merely Prospero, your humble father who lives in a poor little shack."
More to know Did never meddle with my thoughts.,It never occurred to me to imagine there was anything more to know.
'Tis time I should inform thee farther. Lend thy hand And pluck my magic garment from me.,It’s time for you to know the whole story. Give me a hand and help me off with this magic cloak.
"So, The direful spectacle of the wrack, which touched The very virtue of compassion in thee, I have with such provision in mine art So safely ordered that there is no soul— Betid to any creature in the vessel— Which thou heard’st cry, which thou sawst sink. Sit down. For thou must now know farther.","(to the cloak) So, lie there, my magic. (to MIRANDA) Wipe your eyes. Take comfort. I arranged the horrible sight of this shipwreck, which moved you to such pity, so carefully that not a single person was hurt—no, not so much as a hair on anyone’s head was destroyed in the ship that you saw sink. Sit down. It’s time for you to know more. (they sit)"
"You have often Begun to tell me what I am, but stopped Concluding, “Stay. Not yet.”","You’ve often started to tell me who I am, but then suddenly stopped, leaving me asking questions that never get answered, telling me, “Wait. Not yet.”"
The hour’s now come. The very minute bids thee ope thine ear. Obey and be attentive. Canst thou remember A time before we came unto this cell? Out three years old.,"Well, the time has come. This is the moment for you to listen hard and pay close attention. Can you remember the time before you came to live in this shack? I doubt it, since you weren’t even three at the time."
"Certainly, sir, I can.","Sure I can, father."
By what? By any other house or person? Of anything the image tell me that Hath kept with thy remembrance.,"What do you remember? A house, a person? Tell me anything you remember."
"'Tis far off, That my remembrance warrants. Had I not Four or five women once that tended me?","My memory is hazy, more like a dream than a recollection. Didn’t I use to have four or five women taking care of me?"
"Thou hadst, and more, Miranda. But how is it That this lives in thy mind? What seest thou else If thou rememberest aught ere thou camest here, How thou camest here thou mayst.","Indeed you did, and more besides, Miranda. But how is it possible that you still remember this, through all the darkness of the past? If you remember your life before you came here, you may also remember how you got here."
But that I do not.,"No, that I don’t remember."
"Twelve year since, Miranda, twelve year since, Thy father was the Duke of Milan and","Twelve years ago, Miranda, twelve years ago your father was the Duke of Milan, a powerful prince."
"Sir, are not you my father?",Aren’t you my father?
"Thy mother was a piece of virtue and She said thou wast my daughter. And thy father Was Duke of Milan, and thou his only heir And princess no worse issued.","Your mother was extremely virtuous, and she said you were my daughter. And your father was Duke of Milan, and you were his heir, a princess."
"Oh, the heavens! Or blessè was ’t we did?",Good lord! What evil things were done to us that we were driven here? Or was it a blessing that we came here?
"Both, both, my girl. By foul play, as thou sayst, were we heaved thence, But blessedly holp hither.","Both, both, my girl. We were pushed out of power by evil deeds, as you call them. But we were blessed in being helped toward this island."
"Oh, my heart bleeds To think o' th' teen that I have turned you to,","Oh, it breaks my heart to think how painful it must be for you to recall all this, things that I can’t remember. But please tell me more."
"My brother and thy uncle, called Antonio— I pray thee, mark me (that a brother should Be so perfidious!)—he whom next thyself Of all the world I loved and to him put Through all the signories it was the first, And Prospero the prime duke, being so reputed In dignity, and for the liberal arts Without a parallel. Those being all my study, And to my state grew stranger, being transported And rapt in secret studies. Thy false uncle— Dost thou attend me?","My brother, your uncle Antonio—just listen to this (I still can’t believe a brother could be so disloyal!)—My brother whom—aside from you—I loved more than anyone else in the world, I trusted to run my state, which at that time was the strongest in the land, and Prospero the number one duke, famous for my dignity and my education. Since I was so drawn to studying things like logic, grammar, geometry, and astronomy, I let my control of the government slide a bit, being too wrapped up in my occult books. Your disloyal uncle—are you paying attention?"
"Sir, most heedfully.",I’m hanging on every word.
"Being once perfected how to grant suits, To trash for overtopping, new created The creatures that were mine, I say—or changed 'em, Or else new formed 'em—having both the key Of officer and office, set all hearts i' th' state The ivy which had hid my princely trunk, And sucked my verdure out on ’t. Thou attend’st not.","Once Antonio got the knack of granting certain requests, denying others, promoting some officials and keeping down those who were getting too ambitious, he won over the people who used to be mine, or changed them—remade them, you might say. Since he had control over the whole government and everyone in it, he soon made everyone sing his own song—whichever song he happened to like. He became like the ivy that sticks to the side of the tree, and sucked my vitality out of me.—You’re not paying attention."
"O, good sir, I do.","Oh, yes I am, father."
"I pray thee, mark me. I, thus neglecting worldly ends, all dedicated With that which, but by being so retired, O'erprized all popular rate, in my false brother Awaked an evil nature. And my trust, Like a good parent, did beget of him As my trust was, which had indeed no limit, A confidence sans bound. He being thus lorded, Not only with what my revenue yielded But what my power might else exact, like one Made such a sinner of his memory To credit his own lie—he did believe He was indeed the duke, out o' th' substitution And executing th' outward face of royalty, Dost thou hear?","Please listen to me carefully. As I neglected practical matters, being totally dedicated to solitude and to improving my mind with subjects more valuable than most people imagine, I was so shut away from the world that I unwittingly stirred up evil wishes in my disloyal brother. My deep trust in him made him deeply untrustworthy, arousing in him a treachery as big as my trust was—my trust which had no limit, an infinite confidence. With Antonio possessing such powers and wealth, coming not only from my income but also from his ability to take whatever my authority allowed him to take, Antonio started to believe that he was the duke, like some liar who begins to believe in his own lie. He put on the face of royalty, with all the rights that go along with it. With his ambition growing like this—do you hear what I’m saying?"
"Your tale, sir, would cure deafness.","What you’re saying could cure deafness, father. Of course I hear it."
"To have no screen between this part he played And him he played it for, he needs will be Absolute Milan. Me, poor man, my library He thinks me now incapable, confederates— So dry he was for sway—wi' th' King of Naples To give him annual tribute, do him homage, Subject his coronet to his crown and bend To most ignoble stooping.","To make his political performance absolutely perfect, he simply had to become the Duke of Milan himself. My library was a large enough dukedom for me. So, now Antonio judges me incapable of carrying out my duties. He’s so power-hungry that he allies himself with the King of Naples, agreeing to pay him a regular annual sum, swear subservience to him, and put the dukedom of Milan—never subservient to anyone before!—under the humiliating control of Naples."
"Oh, the heavens!",Good heavens!
Mark his condition and the event. Then tell me If this might be a brother.,"Think about that, and about what followed afterward. Then tell me if Antonio can be called a brother."
I should sin To think but nobly of my grandmother.,It would be wrong for me to think poorly of my grandmother. Good women sometimes give birth to bad sons.
"Now the condition. The King of Naples, being an enemy To me inveterate, hearkens my brother’s suit, Which was that he, in lieu o' th' premises Of homage and I know not how much tribute, Out of the dukedom, and confer fair Milan With all the honors on my brother. Whereon, A treacherous army levied, one midnight Fated to th' purpose did Antonio open The ministers for th' purpose hurried thence Me and thy crying self.","Now listen to the agreement they made. The king of Naples, my arch-enemy, listens to my brother’s request, which was that the king, in exchange for the respect and money paid to him, would get rid of me and make my brother Duke of Milan instead. A treacherous army was gathered, and one fateful night at midnight, Antonio opened the gates of Milan, and in the pitch black had his officers rush out me and you, my dear daughter. You were crying."
"Alack, for pity! I, not remembering how I cried out then, Will cry it o'er again. It is a hint","How awful! I can’t remember how I cried then, but I’ll cry all over again. This story breaks my heart."
"Hear a little further And then I’ll bring thee to the present business Which now ’s upon ’s, without the which this story Were most impertinent.","Just listen a little more, and I’ll bring you up to date about the present situation, which is the whole reason I’m telling you this story in the first place."
Wherefore did they not That hour destroy us?,Why didn’t they just kill us that night?
"Well demanded, wench. So dear the love my people bore me, nor set A mark so bloody on the business, but With colors fairer painted their foul ends. In few, they hurried us aboard a bark, A rotten carcass of a butt, not rigged, Nor tackle, sail, nor mast. The very rats Instinctively had quit it. There they hoist us To cry to th' sea that roared to us, to sigh Did us but loving wrong.","Good question, my girl. My story does raise that question. The answer, my dear, is that they didn’t dare, because the people of Milan loved me too much. The had to disguise their bloody intentions. So, to make a long story short, they hurried us onto a ship and carried us a number of miles out to sea, where they prepared a rotten carcass of a boat, with no sails or masts or ropes, which even the rats had abandoned. They tossed us in the water to cry to the sea that roared back at us, to sigh into the winds that sighed right back at us in pity."
"Alack, what trouble Was I then to you!","God, what a burden on you I must have been!"
"Oh, a cherubim Thou wast that did preserve me. Thou didst smile Infusèd with a fortitude from heaven, Under my burthen groaned; which raised in me An undergoing stomach to bear up Against what should ensue.","No, my dear, you were a little angel who kept me going. You smiled with a strength you must have gotten from heaven, while I cried salty tears into the salty sea, and groaned at our situation. Your smile sustained my spirits against whatever would come our way."
How came we ashore?,How did we manage to get ashore?
"By providence divine. A noble Neapolitan, Gonzalo, Out of his charity, who being then appointed Master of this design, did give us, with Rich garments, linens, stuffs, and necessaries, Knowing I loved my books, he furnished me From mine own library with volumes that I prize above my dukedom.","With God’s help. We had a little food and fresh water that a nobleman from Naples, Gonzalo, had given us out of the kindness of his heart. He had been chosen to carry out the plan of putting us to sea. He also gave us clothes, linen, and other necessities that have been of great help. Knowing how much I loved my books, he gave me some books from my library that I value more than my dukedom."
Would I might But ever see that man!,I wish I could see that man someday!
"Now I arise. Sit still, and hear the last of our sea-sorrow. Here in this island we arrived, and here Have I, thy schoolmaster, made thee more profit Than other princesses can that have more time","Now I’ll stand up. (he stands and puts on his magic cloak) Sit still and listen to the last of our sad sea adventures. We arrived here on this island, where I, acting as your teacher, have given you a better education than most princesses get, princesses who have less careful tutors, who spend their time instead on empty fun."
"Heavens thank you for ’t! And now, I pray you, sir— For still ’tis beating in my mind—your reason For raising this sea storm?","May God thank you for it. But please, father—the question is still nagging at me—why did you conjure up this storm?"
"Know thus far forth: By accident most strange, bountiful Fortune Brought to this shore. And by my prescience I find my zenith doth depend upon A most auspicious star, whose influence If now I court not but omit, my fortunes","You should know this: much luck is on my side, and my enemies have happened to wreck their ship on this island. As I see it, my fate hangs on this lucky event, and if I handle it wrong, I’ll suffer for the rest of my life. Now, no more questions."
"Thou art inclined to sleep. 'Tis a good dullness, And give it way. I know thou canst not choose.","You look sleepy. It’s a nice hazy feeling, so give in to it. I know you have no choice. "
"Come away, servant, come. I am ready now. Approach, my Ariel, come.","Come on, servant, come. I’m ready now. Come here, Ariel."
"To answer thy best pleasure, be ’t to fly, To swim, to dive into the fire, to ride On the curled clouds. To thy strong bidding, task Ariel and all his quality.","Humble greetings, great master! Worthy sir, greetings! Your wish is my command, whatever you want. If you want me to fly, to swim, to jump into fire, to ride the clouds in the sky, Ariel will get right to the task."
"Hast thou, spirit,","Spirit, did you carry out the storm just as I ordered?"
"To every article. I boarded the king’s ship. Now on the beak, Now in the waist, the deck, in every cabin, I flamed amazement. Sometime I’d divide, The yards, and bowsprit would I flame distinctly, Then meet and join. Jove’s lightning, the precursors O' th' dreadful thunderclaps, more momentary And sight-outrunning were not. The fire and cracks Seem to besiege and make his bold waves tremble, Yea, his dread trident shake.","Down to the last detail. I boarded the king’s ship, and in every corner of it, from the deck to the cabins, I made everyone astonished and terrified. Sometimes I appeared in many places at once. On the top sail and main mast I flamed in different spots, then I came together into a single flame. I flashed about faster than lightning. The fire and deafening cracks seemed to overwhelm even the god of the sea himself, making him tremble underwater."
"My brave spirit! Who was so firm, so constant, that this coil Would not infect his reason?",Good spirit! Who could ever be so steady and strong that a disturbance like that wouldn’t make him crazy?
"Not a soul Some tricks of desperation. All but mariners Plunged in the foaming brine and quit the vessel, Then all afire with me. The king’s son, Ferdinand, With hair up-staring—then, like reeds, not hair— And all the devils are here.”","Everyone there got a little crazy and pulled some desperate stunts. Everyone except the sailors dove into the sea, leaving behind the ship that I had set on fire. The king’s son, Ferdinand, with his hair standing straight up—it looked like reeds, not hair—was the first person to jump, shouting, “Hell is empty, and all the devils are here!”"
"Why, that’s my spirit! But was not this nigh shore?",Good job! But was this near the shore?
"Close by, my master.","Very near, my master."
"But are they, Ariel, safe?","But are they all safe, Ariel?"
"Not a hair perished. On their sustaining garments not a blemish, In troops I have dispersed them 'bout the isle. The king’s son have I landed by himself, Whom I left cooling of the air with sighs In an odd angle of the isle, and sitting,","Nobody was hurt in the slightest. Even their clothes are unstained, and look fresher than before the storm. I’ve separated them into groups around the island, just as you ordered. I sent the king’s son off by himself to a faraway nook on the island, where he’s sitting now sighing, with his arms crossed like this. (he folds his arms.)"
"Of the king’s ship, The mariners, say how thou hast disposed, And all the rest o' th' fleet.","Tell me what you did with the king’s ship, the sailors, and the other ships."
Safely in harbor Is the king’s ship. In the deep nook where once Thou called’st me up at midnight to fetch dew,"The king’s ship is safely in the harbor, hidden in that deep cove where you once summoned me to bring back dew from the stormy Bermuda islands."
"The mariners all under hatches stowed, Who, with a charm joined to their suffered labor, I have left asleep. And for the rest o' th' fleet, Which I dispersed, they all have met again Bound sadly home for Naples, Supposing that they saw the king’s ship wracked And his great person perish.","The sailors are all below deck, sleeping both from their labor and from a magic spell I cast over them. As for the rest of the ships, I scattered them, and they’ve gathered again in the Mediterranean, sailing sadly home to Naples, believing that they witnessed the shipwreck and death of their great king."
"Ariel, thy charge Exactly is performed. But there’s more work.","Ariel, you’ve done your work exactly as I ordered. But there’s more work to be done. What time is it?"
Past the mid season.,Past noon.
At least two glasses. The time ’twixt six and now Must by us both be spent most preciously.,At least two hours past. We can’t waste time between now and six o'clock.
"Is there more toil? Since thou dost give me pains, Let me remember thee what thou hast promised,","Is there more work to do? Since you’re giving me new assignments, let me remind you what you promised me but haven’t come through with yet."
How now? Moody? What is ’t thou canst demand?,What? You’re in a bad mood? What could you possibly ask for?
My liberty.,My freedom.
Before the time be out? No more!,Before your sentence has been completed? Don’t say anything else.
"I prithee, Remember I have done thee worthy service, Told thee no lies, made thee no mistakings, served To bate me a full year.","I beg you, remember the good work I’ve done for you, and how I’ve never lied to you, never made mistakes, and never grumbled in my work. You promised to take a full year off my sentence."
Dost thou forget From what a torment I did free thee?,Have you forgotten the torture I freed you from?
No.,No.
"Thou dost, and think’st it much to tread the ooze To run upon the sharp wind of the north, To do me business in the veins o' th' earth When it is baked with frost.","You have forgotten, and you think it’s a burden when I ask you to walk through the ocean, or run on the north wind, or do business for me underground when the earth’s frozen solid."
"I do not, sir.","No, I don’t, sir."
"Thou liest, malignant thing! Hast thou forgot Was grown into a hoop? Hast thou forgot her?","You lie, you nasty, ungrateful thing! Have you forgotten the horrid witch Sycorax, stooped over with old age and ill will? Have you forgotten her?"
"No, sir.","No, sir."
Thou hast. Where was she born? Speak. Tell me.,You have. Where was she born? Speak. Tell me.
"Sir, in Argier.","In Algiers, sir."
"Oh, was she so? I must Which thou forget’st. This damned witch Sycorax, For mischiefs manifold and sorceries terrible To enter human hearing, from Argier, Thou know’st, was banished. For one thing she did","Oh, was she now? I’ll have to tell the story again every month, since you seem to forget it. This damned witch Sycorax was kicked out of Algiers for various witching crimes too terrible for humans to hear about. But for one reason they refused to execute her. Isn’t that true?"
"Ay, sir.","Yes, sir."
"This blue-eyed hag was hither brought with child And here was left by th' sailors. Thou, my slave, As thou report’st thyself, wast then her servant. To act her earthy and abhorred commands, Refusing her grand hests, she did confine thee, By help of her more potent ministers And in her most unmitigable rage, Imprisoned thou didst painfully remain A dozen years; within which space she died And left thee there, where thou didst vent thy groans As fast as mill wheels strike. Then was this island— A freckled whelp hag-born—not honored with A human shape.","This sunken-eyed hag was brought here pregnant and left by the sailors. You, my slave, were her servant at the time, as you admit yourself. You were too delicate to carry out her horrible orders, and you refused. In a fit of rage she locked you up in a hollow pine tree, with the help of her powerful assistants, and left you there for twelve years. During that time she died, and you were trapped, moaning and groaning as fast as the blades of a mill A mill is a building with machinery for grinding grain into flour. If built next to a river, the machinery would be driven by a paddled wheel propelled by the river. mill wheel strike the water. At that time there were no people here. This island was not honored with a human being—except for the son that Sycorax gave birth to here, a freckled baby born of an old hag."
"Yes, Caliban, her son.","Yes, Caliban, her son."
"Dull thing, I say so. He, that Caliban Whom now I keep in service. Thou best know’st Of ever angry bears. It was a torment Did make wolves howl and penetrate the breasts To lay upon the damned, which Sycorax Could not again undo. It was mine art, The pine and let thee out.","That’s right, you stupid thing. Caliban, who now serves me. You know better than anyone how tortured you were when I found you. Your groans made wolves howl, and even made bears feel sorry for you. Nobody but the damned souls of hell deserves the spell that Sycorax put on you and couldn’t undo. It was my magic that saved you when I arrived on the island and heard you, making the pine tree open and let you out."
"I thank thee, master.","Thank you, master."
"If thou more murmur’st, I will rend an oak And peg thee in his knotty entrails till Thou hast howled away twelve winters.","If you complain any more, I’ll split an oak tree and lock you up in it till you’ve howled for twelve years."
"Pardon, master. And do my spiriting gently.","Please forgive me, master. I’ll be obedient and do all my tasks without complaining."
"Do so, and after two days I will discharge thee.","Do that, and I’ll set you free in two days."
"That’s my noble master! What shall I do? Say, what? What shall I do?","That’s noble of you, master. What shall I do for you? Just tell me. What shall I do?"
Go make thyself like a nymph o' th' sea. Be subject To every eyeball else. Go take this shape And hither come in ’t. Go hence with diligence.,"Go disguise yourself as a sea nymph. Be invisible to everyone except yourself and me. Take this garment, put it on, and then come back here. Hurry, go!"
"(to MIRANDA) Awake, dear heart, awake! Thou hast slept well.","(to MIRANDA) Wake up, my dear. Wake up. You’ve slept well. Wake up."
(waking) The strangeness of your story put Heaviness in me.,(waking up)Your strange story made me groggy.
"Shake it off. Come on. We’ll visit Caliban, my slave who never Yields us kind answer.","Shake off your sleepiness. Come on. We’ll go visit Caliban, my slave who always talks to us so nastily."
"'Tis a villain, sir,","He’s Prospero hands Ariel a garment that makes him invisible. For the rest of the play, when we see him in the garment, we know he’s invisible. He’s an evil one, father. I don’t like him."
"But as ’tis, We cannot miss him. He does make our fire, Fetch in our wood, and serves in offices That profit us.—What, ho! Slave! Caliban! Thou earth, thou! Speak.","But even so, we can’t do without him. He builds our fires, gets our firewood, and does all kinds of useful things for us.—Hey! Caliban! Pile of dirt! Say something."
(within)    There’s wood enough within.,(offstage) You’ve got enough firewood already.
"Come, thou tortoise! When?","Come out, I order you. There’s other work for you to do. Come on, you turtle!"
"Fine apparition! My quaint Ariel, Hark in thine ear. (whispers to ARIEL)","What a fine sight! My dear clever Ariel, listen carefully. (he whispers to ARIEL)"
My lord it shall be done.,"My lord, I’ll do it right away."
"(to CALIBAN) Thou poisonous slave, got by the devil himself","(to CALIBAN) You horrible slave, with a wicked hag for a mother and the devil himself for a father, come out!"
As wicked dew as e'er my mother brushed With raven’s feather from unwholesome fen Drop on you both! A southwest blow on ye And blister you all o'er!,I hope you both get drenched with a dew as evil as what my mother used to collect with a crow’s feather from the poison swamps. May a hot southwest wind blow on you and cover you with blisters all over.
"Side-stitches that shall pen thy breath up. Urchins Shall, forth at vast of night that they may work, All exercise on thee. Thou shalt be pinched As thick as honeycomb, each pinch more stinging","I’ll give you cramps for saying that—horrible pains in your sides that will keep you from breathing. I’ll send goblins out at night to work their nasty deeds on you. You’ll be pricked all over, and it’ll sting like bees."
"I must eat my dinner. This island’s mine, by Sycorax my mother, Which thou takest from me. When thou camest first, Thou strok’st me and made much of me, wouldst give me Water with berries in ’t, and teach me how That burn by day and night. And then I loved thee And showed thee all the qualities o' th' isle, The fresh springs, brine pits, barren place and fertile. Cursed be I that did so! All the charms For I am all the subjects that you have, Which first was mine own king. And here you sty me In this hard rock, whiles you do keep from me The rest o' th' island.","I have to eat my dinner now. This island belongs to me because Sycorax, my mother, left it to me. But you’ve taken it from me. When you first got here, you petted me and took care of me, you would give me water with berries in it, and you taught me the names for the sun and the moon, the big light and the smaller light that burn in daytime and nighttime. I loved you back then. I showed you all the features of the island, the freshwater springs, the saltwater pits, the barren places and the fertile ones. I curse myself for doing that! I wish I could use all the magic spells of Sycorax against you and plague you with toads, beetles, and bats. I’m the only subject you have in your kingdom, and you were my first king, and you pen me up in this cave and don’t let me go anywhere else on the island."
"Thou most lying slave, Filth as thou art, with human care, and lodged thee In mine own cell till thou didst seek to violate The honor of my child.","You liar, you respond better to the whip than to kindness! I took good care of you—piece of filth that you are—and let you stay in my own hut until you tried to rape my daughter."
"Oh ho, oh ho! Would ’t had been done! This isle with Calibans.","Oh ho, oh ho! I wish I had! You stopped me. If you hadn’t, I would have filled this island with a race of Calibans."
"Abhorrèd slave, Which any print of goodness wilt not take, Being capable of all ill! I pitied thee, Took pains to make thee speak, taught thee each hour Know thine own meaning, but wouldst gabble like A thing most brutish, I endowed thy purposes With words that made them known. But thy vile race, Though thou didst learn, had that in ’t which good natures Deservedly confined into this rock, Who hadst deserved more than a prison.","You horrid slave, you can’t be trained to be good, and you’re capable of anything evil! I pitied you, worked hard to teach you to speak, and taught you some new thing practically every hour. When you didn’t know what you were saying, and were babbling like an animal, I helped you find words to make your point understandable. But you had bad blood in you, no matter how much you learned, and good people couldn’t stand to be near you. So you got what you deserved, and were locked up in this cave, which is more fitting for the likes of you than a prison would be."
"You taught me language, and my profit on ’t Is I know how to curse. The red plague rid you","You taught me language, and all I can do with it is curse. Damn you for teaching me your language!"
"Hag-seed, hence! Fetch us in fuel. And be quick, thou 'rt best, To answer other business. Shrug’st thou, malice? If thou neglect’st or dost unwillingly What I command, I’ll rack thee with old cramps, That beasts shall tremble at thy din.","Get out of here, you son of a bitch! Bring us wood, and be quick about it. Are you shrugging and making faces, you evil thing? If you neglect my orders or do them grudgingly, I’ll double you up with pains and cramps, and make all your bones ache, and make you scream so loud that the wild animals will tremble when they hear you."
"No, pray thee. (aside) I must obey. His art is of such power, It would control my dam’s god, Setebos, And make a vassal of him.","No, please. (to himself) I have to obey. He’s got such strong magic powers that he could conquer and enslave the god, Setebos, that my mother used to worship."
"So, slave, hence!","Go then, slave."
"Come unto these yellow sands, And then take hands. Curtsied when you have, and kissed The wild waves whist. Foot it featly here and there, And, sweet sprites, bear The burden. Hark, hark!","(singing) Come onto these yellow sands, And we’ll join hands, When you’ve curtsied and kissed The waves into silence. Prance lightly here and there, And the sweet spirits bear The burden. Listen, listen!"
"(dispersedly, within) Bow-wow.","(refrain of the song is heard offstage, from different places, not in unison) Bow-wow."
The watchdogs bark.,The watchdogs bark.
(within) Bow-wow.,(offstage) Bow-wow.
"Hark, hark! I hear Cry “Cock-a-diddle-dow.”","Listen, listen! I hear The tune of the strutting rooster Who cries cock-a-doodle-doo."
"Where should this music be? I' th' air or th' earth? It sounds no more, and sure, it waits upon Some god o' th' island. Sitting on a bank, This music crept by me upon the waters, Allaying both their fury and my passion With its sweet air. Thence I have followed it, Or it hath drawn me rather. But ’tis gone.","Where’s that music coming from? From the earth, or the air? It’s stopped now—it must be played for some local god of the island. As I sat on the shore crying over my father’s shipwreck, I heard the music creep over the wild waves, calming their fury and soothing my own grief with its sweet melodies. I followed it here, or I should say it dragged me here. But now it’s stopped. No, there it is again."
"(sings) Full fathom five thy father lies. Of his bones are coral made. Those are pearls that were his eyes. Nothing of him that doth fade, But doth suffer a sea-change Into something rich and strange. Sea-nymphs hourly ring his knell","(singing) Your father lies five whole fathoms fathom = feet fathoms below, His bones have turned to coral now. His eyes have turned to pearls. There’s nothing left of him, He’s undergone a complete sea change And become something rich and strange. Sea nymphs ring his death bell every hour."
(within) Ding-dong.,"(refrain, offstage)Ding-dong."
"Hark, now I hear them.","Listen, I hear them."
"(within)  Ding-dong, bell.","Ding dong, bell."
The ditty does remember my drowned father. That the earth owes. I hear it now above me.,This song’s about my dead father. It couldn’t be sung by mere mortals. I hear it now overhead.
(to MIRANDA) The fringèd curtains of thine eye advance And say what thou seest yond.,(to MIRANDA) Raise the curtains of your eyelids and go take a peek at what you can see out there.
"What is ’t? A spirit? Lord, how it looks about! Believe me, sir,","What is it? A spirit? Lord, it’s glancing every which way! How handsome it is. It must be a spirit."
"No, wench! It eats and sleeps and hath such senses As we have, such. This gallant which thou seest Was in the wrack. And, but he’s something stained With grief that’s beauty’s canker, thou mightst call him And strays about to find 'em.","No, girl! It eats and sleeps and has the same five senses we do. The gentleman you see now was in the shipwreck, and if he weren’t a little spoiled by grief, which always ruins good looks, you could call him handsome. He’s lost his comrades and is wandering around looking for them."
"I might call him A thing divine, for nothing natural I ever saw so noble.","I could imagine he’s divine, since I never saw anything so noble-looking on earth before."
"(aside)    It goes on, I see, As my soul prompts it.—Spirit, fine spirit! I’ll free thee","(to himself) It’s all happening according to plan, just as my soul wanted it to happen. (to ARIEL) Spirit, you fine spirit, I’ll set you free in two days for doing such a good job here."
"(seeing MIRANDA)  Most sure, the goddess On whom these airs attend!—Vouchsafe my prayer May know if you remain upon this island, And that you will some good instruction give Which I do last pronounce, is—O you wonder!— If you be maid or no.","(seeing MIRANDA) This must surely be the goddess that the music is being played for!—Please, I beg you to answer me, tell me if you live on this island, and tell me how I should behave here. My main question, which I save for the last, is—Oh, you marvelous creature!—are you a maiden or a goddess?"
"No wonder, sir, But certainly a maid.","I’m not marvelous, sir, but I’m certainly a maiden."
"My language! Heavens, I am the best of them that speak this speech,","She speaks my language! My God, I’m the highest-ranking person who speaks this language—if only we were back where it’s spoken."
How? The best? What wert thou if the King of Naples heard thee?,What’s that? The highest-ranking? What would the King of Naples do if he heard you say that?
"A single thing, as I am now, that wonders To hear thee speak of Naples. He does hear me, And that he does I weep. Myself am Naples, The king my father wracked.","He would just see me for what I am, a person amazed to hear you talking about Naples. He does hear me, and that makes me cry. I myself am the King of Naples, since I saw with my own eyes—these eyes that haven’t been dry since—my father killed in a shipwreck."
"Alack, for mercy!","Ah, how pitiful!"
"Yes, faith, and all his lords, the Duke of Milan And his brave son being twain.","Yes, indeed, and all the King’s men, the Duke of Milan and his fine son too."
"(aside)   The Duke of Milan And his more braver daughter could control thee They have changed eyes.—Delicate Ariel, I’ll set thee free for this. (to FERDINAND) A word, good sir. I fear you have done yourself some wrong. A word.","(to himself) The real Duke of Milan and his far finer daughter could beat you in a heartbeat, if it were the right time. They’ve fallen in love at first sight!—Wonderful Ariel, I’ll set you free for doing such good work here. (to FERDINAND) Could I have a word with you, sir? I’m afraid you’ve made a mistake. Just a word."
"Is the third man that e'er I saw, the first That e'er I sighed for. Pity move my father To be inclined my way!","(to herself) Why is my father speaking to him so rudely? This is the third man I’ve ever seen in my life, and the first one I’ve felt romantic feelings for. I hope my father takes pity on me and treats him well for my sake!"
"(to MIRANDA) Oh, if a virgin, The queen of Naples.","Oh, if you’re a virgin, and you haven’t given your heart to another man, then I’ll make you the queen of Naples."
"Soft, sir! One word more. (aside) They are both in either’s powers, but this swift business I must uneasy make lest too light winning (to FERDINAND) One word more. I charge thee That thou attend me. Thou dost here usurp The name thou owest not, and hast put thyself Upon this island as a spy to win it","Hang on, sir! Just a moment. (to himself) They’re both in love. But I need to cause a little trouble between them, or else they’ll never appreciate the value of their love. (to FERDINAND) I need a word with you, sir. I order you to listen to me. You’re calling yourself by a name that doesn’t belong to you. You’ve come onto this island as a spy, to snatch it away from me—I’m the rightful lord of it."
"No, as I am a man!","No, I swear, that’s not true!"
"There’s nothing ill can dwell in such a temple. If the ill spirit have so fair a house, Good things will strive to dwell with ’t.","A man as handsome as that can’t have anything evil in him. If the devil had such a beautiful house as his body, then good things would fight to live in it."
"(to MIRANDA) Speak not you for him. He’s a traitor. (to FERDINAND)    Come, I’ll manacle thy neck and feet together. Seawater shalt thou drink. Thy food shall be Wherein the acorn cradled. Follow.","(to FERDINAND) Follow me. (to MIRANDA) Don’t defend him. He’s a traitor. (to FERDINAND) Come on, I’ll chain your neck and feet together, and I’ll give you sea water to drink. Your food will be slugs, dry roots, and acorn shells. Come on."
No. I will resist such entertainment till Mine enemy has more power.,"No, I’ll have to decline that offer—at least as long as I’m stronger than you are."
"O dear father, Make not too rash a trial of him, for","Oh, dear father, don’t judge him too quickly. He’s a good man, and brave too."
"What, I say? My foot my tutor?—Put thy sword up, traitor, Who makest a show but darest not strike, thy conscience Is so possessed with guilt. Come from thy ward, For I can here disarm thee with this stick","What’s that? The daughter knows more than the father?—Put away your sword, traitor. You make quite a show there, but you’re too scared to strike at me, since you feel too guilty. Get out of that position, because I can disarm you with my magic wand and make your sword drop."
"Beseech you, father.","Please, father, I beg you."
Hence! Hang not on my garments.,Let go of me! Don’t tug on my clothes.
"Sir, have pity, I’ll be his surety.","Father, take pity on him. I’ll guarantee his goodness myself."
"Silence! One word more Shall make me chide thee, if not hate thee. What, An advocate for an imposter? Hush, Having seen but him and Caliban. Foolish wench, To th' most of men this is a Caliban And they to him are angels.","Quiet! If you say one more word, I’ll punish you, maybe even hate you. You’re defending an impostor? Be quiet. You think he’s special, since you’ve only ever seen him and Caliban. Foolish girl, in the eyes of most people this man’s a Caliban, and compared to him, they’re angels."
My affections Are then most humble. I have no ambition,Then my love is humble. I don’t feel any urge to see a more handsome man than this one.
(to FERDINAND)   Come on. Obey. Thy nerves are in their infancy again And have no vigor in them.,(to FERDINAND) Come on. Obey my orders. Your muscles are all limp and lifeless.
"So they are. My spirits, as in a dream, are all bound up. The wrack of all my friends, nor this man’s threats, To whom I am subdued, are but light to me, Might I but through my prison once a day Behold this maid. All corners else o' th' earth Have I in such a prison.","That’s true, they are. My strength is all gone, as if in a dream. The death of my father, my physical weakness, the loss of all my friends, the threats of this man who’s taken me prisoner—all that would be easy for me to take, if only I could look through my prison windows once a day and see this girl. I don’t need any more freedom than that. A prison like that would give me enough liberty."
"(aside)  It works! (to FERDINAND)    Come on. (aside) Thou hast done well, fine Ariel! (to FERDINAND)    Follow me.","(to himself) It’s working! (to FERDINAND) Come on. (to himself) You’ve done well, Ariel. (to FERDINAND) Follow me. (to ARIEL) Listen to what you’ll do for me next."
"(to FERDINAND)  Be of comfort. My father’s of a better nature, sir, Than he appears by speech. This is unwonted Which now came from him.","(to FERDINAND) Don’t worry, my father’s kinder than his words just now make him sound. What he said didn’t sound like him at all."
As mountain winds. But then exactly do All points of my command.,(to ARIEL) You’ll be free as a bird. But you have to do exactly what I order.
To th' syllable.,Down to the last detail.
"(to FERDINAND) Come, follow.","(to FERDINAND) Come, follow me. (to MIRANDA) Don’t defend him."
"(to ALONSO) Beseech you, sir, be merry. You have cause, So have we all, of joy, for our escape Is much beyond our loss. Our hint of woe The masters of some merchant, and the merchant Have just our theme of woe. But for the miracle— I mean our preservation—few in millions Can speak like us. Then wisely, good sir, weigh","(to ALONSO) Please cheer up, sir. Like all of us, you have a good reason to be happy. The fact that we’re alive outweighs our losses. Many people every day feel the sadness we feel now. Every day some sailor’s wife, a ship’s crew, the merchant who hired the ship all experience the same loss we’ve undergone. But the miracle—the fact that we were saved—only happens to a few people out of millions. So remember that, and take comfort in it, to counterbalance our sadness."
"Prithee, peace.",Please say no more.
(to ANTONIO) He receives comfort like cold porridge.,(to ANTONIO) Alonso enjoys these comforting words about as much as cold oatmeal.
(to SEBASTIAN) The visitor will not give him o'er so.,(to SEBASTIAN) But the goodwill ambassador won’t give up that easily.
Look he’s winding up the watch of his wit. By and by it will strike.,(to ANTONIO) Look. He’s like a clock winding up to strike the hour.
(to ALONSO) Sir—,(to ALONSO) Sir—
(to ANTONIO) One. Tell.,(to ANTONIO) There he goes! Now we can tell what time it is.
"When every grief is entertained that’s offered, Comes to th' entertainer—","If we let every sad thing that happens to us get us down, then we would find ourselves—"
A dollar.,What a pain.
"Dolor comes to him, indeed. You have spoken truer than you purposed.","Pain, yes indeed. We would find ourselves in pain. You thought you were being funny, but you said the truth."
You have taken it wiselier than I meant you should.,You’re taking it more seriously than I meant it.
"(to ALONSO) Therefore, my lord—","(to ALONSO) Therefore, sir—"
"(to SEBASTIAN) Fie, what a spendthrift is he of his tongue!","(to SEBASTIAN) God, doesn’t he ever shut up?"
"(to GONZALO) I prithee, spare.","(to GONZALO) Please, no more."
"Well, I have done. But yet—","Well, I’m nearly finished. But just one last thing—"
(to ANTONIO) He will be talking.,(to ANTONIO) He insists on talking.
"Which, of he or Adrian, for a good wager, first begins to crow?","Hey, let’s bet. Which one will start yammering first, Gonzalo or Adrian?"
The old cock.,The old guy.
The cockerel.,I pick the younger one.
Done. The wager?,You’re on. What’s the prize?
A laughter.,A good laugh.
A match!,It’s a deal!
Though this island seem to be desert—,Though this island may appear desolate—
"(to SEBASTIAN) Ha, ha, ha!","(to SEBASTIAN) Ha, ha, ha!"
So you’re paid.,"Fine, you win."
Uninhabitable and almost inaccessible—,"Uninhabitable and almost inaccessible, as it were—"
Yet—,Now he’s going to say “but”—
Yet—,But—
He could not miss ’t.,"He had to say it, it was unavoidable."
"It must needs be of subtle, tender, and delicate temperance.","The island must be mild, and have a temperate climate."
Temperance was a delicate wench.,I knew Temperance—she was a fine girl.
"Ay, and a subtle, as he most learnedly delivered.","Yes, and she was mild too."
The air breathes upon us here most sweetly.,There’s always a breath of fresh air here.
"As if it had lungs, and rotten ones.","A breath from rotten lungs, maybe."
Or as ’twere perfumed by a fen.,Stinking like a swamp.
Here is everything advantageous to life.,This island contains everything beneficial to life.
True. Save means to live.,True. Everything except something to live on.
"Of that there’s none, or little.",There’s little or nothing of that.
How lush and lusty the grass looks! How green!,Look how lush and healthy the grass is! How green!
The ground indeed is tawny.,The ground is brown.
With an eye of green in ’t.,With a touch of green in it.
He misses not much.,He doesn’t miss a thing.
"No, he doth but mistake the truth totally.","No, he just gets reality completely wrong."
But the rarity of it is—which is indeed almost beyond credit—,But the really unbelievable thing is—and this is incredible—
As many vouched rarities are.,As most unbelievable things are.
"That our garments, being, as they were, drenched in the sea, hold notwithstanding their freshness and glosses, being rather new-dyed than stained with salt water.","That our clothes were drenched with sea water, but they came out looking brand-new."
"If but one of his pockets could speak, would it not say he lies?","Listen to him. If his clothes could talk, they’d call him a liar."
"Ay, or very falsely pocket up his report.",Or stuff what he says into their pockets.
"Methinks our garments are now as fresh as when we put them on first in Afric, at the marriage of the king’s fair daughter Claribel to the King of Tunis.","Seriously, I think our clothes are as fresh now as they were the day we put them on in Africa, when we attended the marriage of the king’s daughter Claribel to the King of Tunis."
"'Twas a sweet marriage, and we prosper well in our return.","It was a lovely wedding, and we’re doing really well on our trip home."
Tunis was never graced before with such a paragon to their queen.,Tunis has never had such a beautiful queen.
Not since widow Dido’s time.,"Not since the days of widow Dido According to Greek legend, Dido was the founder of the city of Carthage, on the coast of Africa Dido ."
Widow! A pox o' that! How came that “widow” in? Widow Dido!,Widow? Why the hell is he calling her “widow Dido”?
"What if he had said “widower Æneas” too? Good Lord, how you take it!","Next thing you know, he’ll be saying “widower Aeneas.”"
"“Widow Dido” said you? You make me study of that. She was of Carthage, not of Tunis.","“Widow Dido,” did you say? I’m not sure about that. Dido was from Carthage, not Tunis."
"This Tunis, sir, was Carthage.","Tunis Gonzalo is mistaken in identifying Carthage with Tunis. Tunis was Carthage, sir."
Carthage?,Carthage?
"I assure you, Carthage.","I’m telling you, it was Carthage."
His word is more than the miraculous harp. He hath raised the wall and houses too.,"Gonzalo is a miracle-worker. If he says Carthage was here, then Carthage must be here."
What impossible matter will he make easy next?,What miracle will he work next?
I think he will carry this island home in his pocket and give it his son for an apple.,I think he’ll carry this island home in his pocket and give it to his son like an apple.
"And sowing the kernels of it in the sea, bring forth more islands.","And then throw the seeds in the sea, to make more islands grow."
Ay.,Yes indeed.
"Why, in good time.","Absolutely, yes indeed."
"(to ALONSO) Sir, we were talking that our garments seem now as fresh as when we were at Tunis at the marriage of your daughter, who is now queen.","(to ALONSO) Sir, we were saying that our clothes seem just as fresh as they did when we attended the wedding of your daughter, who’s now queen of Tunis."
And the rarest that e'er came there.,The most beautiful queen they ever had.
"Bate, I beseech you, widow Dido.","I beg your pardon, except for the widow Dido."
"Oh, widow Dido? Ay, widow Dido.","Oh, except for the widow Dido? That’s right, except for the widow Dido."
"Is not, sir, my doublet as fresh as the first day I wore it? I mean, in a sort.","Isn’t my vest just as clean and fresh as the day I put it on? In a way, I mean."
That “sort” was well fished for.,“In a way” is the right way to go.
When I wore it at your daughter’s marriage?,I mean when I wore it at your daughter’s wedding.
"You cram these words into mine ears against The stomach of my sense. Would I had never Married my daughter there! For, coming thence, Who is so far from Italy removed I ne'er again shall see her.—O thou mine heir Of Naples and of Milan, what strange fish Hath made his meal on thee?","You keep cramming words into my ears that I don’t want to hear. I wish that wedding had never happened, since I lost my son because of it, and I lost my daughter too in a way, since she’s moved so far from Milan that I’ll never see her again.—Oh, dear son of mine and heir of Naples and Milan, what strange fish has made a meal of you?"
"Sir, he may live. And ride upon their backs. He trod the water, Whose enmity he flung aside, and breasted The surge most swoll'n that met him. His bold head 'Bove the contentious waves he kept, and oared To th' shore, that o'er his wave-worn basis bowed, As stooping to relieve him. I not doubt He came alive to land.","Sir, he may still be alive. I saw him swimming strongly, almost as if he was riding the waves. He treaded water and kept his head well above the wild waters coming at him, swimming with his strong arms toward the shore, which almost seemed eager to welcome him. I have no doubt he got ashore alive."
"No, no, he’s gone.","No, no, he’s dead."
"Sir, you may thank yourself for this great loss, But rather loose her to an African, Where she at least is banished from your eye, Who hath cause to wet the grief on ’t.","Sir, you can thank yourself for this great loss, because you wouldn’t bless Europe with your daughter, but instead pimped her out to an African. At least you can be thankful that she won’t be around to remind you of your loss."
"Prithee, peace.",Please be quiet.
"You were kneeled to and importuned otherwise Weighed between loathness and obedience, at Which end o' th' beam should bow. We have lost your son, I fear, forever. Milan and Naples have More widows in them of this business' making The fault’s your own.","We all begged you not to go ahead with those marriage plans, and your lovely daughter struggled between disgust at marrying an African and the desire to obey you. Now I’m afraid we’ve lost your son forever. Our shipwreck has made more women widows in Milan and Naples than there are survivors to comfort them. And it’s all your fault."
So is the dearest o' th' loss.,And the greatest sorrow is mine too.
"My lord Sebastian, The truth you speak doth lack some gentleness And time to speak it in. You rub the sore","My lord Sebastian, even though what you say is true, your way of saying it is tactless and comes at the wrong time. You’re rubbing salt in his wounds when you should be applying bandages."
Very well.,"All right, I’ll stop."
And most chirurgeonly.,Like a good doctor.
"(to ALONSO) It is foul weather in us all, good sir, When you are cloudy.","(to ALONSO) It’s bad times for all of us, sir, when you’re feeling gloomy."
Foul weather?,Bad times?
Very foul.,"Yes, very bad."
"Had I plantation of this isle, my lord—","If I could colonize this island, my lord—"
He’d sow ’t with nettle seed.,He’d cultivate weeds on it.
"Or docks, or mallows.",Or thorn-bushes.
"And were the king on ’t, what would I do?","And if I were king of it, you know what I’d do?"
'Scape being drunk for want of wine.,"He wouldn’t get drunk much, since there’s no wine here."
"I' th' commonwealth I would by contraries Execute all things. For no kind of traffic Letters should not be known. Riches, poverty, And use of service—none. Contract, succession, Bourn, bound of land, tilth, vineyard—none. No use of metal, corn, or wine, or oil. And women too, but innocent and pure. No sovereignty—","In my kingdom I’d do everything differently from the way it’s usually done. I wouldn’t allow any commerce. There’d be no officials or administrators. There’d be no schooling or literature. There’d be no riches, no poverty, and no servants—none. No contracts or inheritance laws; no division of the land into private farms, no metal-working, agriculture, or vineyards. There’d be no work. Men would have nothing to do, and women also—but they’d be innocent and pure. There’d be no kingship—"
Yet he would be king on ’t.,He wants to be king in a place with no kingship.
The latter end of his commonwealth forgets the beginning.,"Yes, he’s getting a bit confused."
"All things in common nature should produce Sword, pike, knife, gun, or need of any engine, Would I not have. But nature should bring forth Of its own kind all foison, all abundance, To feed my innocent people.","Everything would be produced without labor, and would be shared by all. There’d be no treason, crimes, or weapons. Nature would produce its harvests in abundance, to feed my innocent people."
No marrying ’mong his subjects?,There’d be no marriage?
"None, man. All idle. Whores and knaves.",No. Everyone would have nothing to do. They’d all be whores and slackers.
"I would with such perfection govern, sir, T' excel the Golden Age.",I would rule so perfectly that my country would outshine the Golden Age they had in ancient times.
'Save his majesty!,Long live his Majesty!
Long live Gonzalo!,All hail Gonzalo!
"(to ALONSO)     And—do you mark me, sir?","(to ALONSO) Are you listening to me, sir?"
"Prithee, no more. Thou dost talk nothing to me.","Oh, please be quiet. You’re spouting empty words."
"I do well believe your highness, and did it to minister occasion to these gentlemen, who are of such sensible and nimble lungs that they always use to laugh at nothing.","You’re absolutely right, your highness. I talked like that to give these gentlemen here a chance to have a good laugh. They love to laugh at empty words."
'Twas you we laughed at.,It’s you we were laughing at.
Who in this kind of merry fooling am nothing to you. So you may continue and laugh at nothing still.,"But from your perspective I don’t matter, so I’m just an empty nobody for you. Go ahead and laugh at my empty words some more."
What a blow was there given!,"Ouch, what a comeback!"
An it had not fallen flat-long.,He sure did. Too bad it fell flat.
You are gentlemen of brave mettle. You would lift the moon out of her sphere if she would continue in it five weeks without changing.,You’re brave gentlemen. You’d give the moon a shove if it got stuck five weeks in its orbit.
"We would so, and then go a-batfowling.","That’s right, and then after we fixed the moon, we’d go bird-hunting."
"(to GONZALO) Nay, good my lord, be not angry.","(to GONZALO) Don’t be angry with us, my lord."
"No, I warrant you. I will not adventure my discretion so weakly. Will you laugh me asleep, for I am very heavy?","I’m not. I’ve got good judgment, and I know you’ve got nothing against me. Will you laugh me to sleep? I’m feeling very sleepy."
"Go sleep, and hear us.","Go to sleep, and listen to us laughing."
"What, all so soon asleep? I wish mine eyes Would with themselves shut up my thoughts. I find They are inclined to do so.","What, everybody falls asleep so fast? I wish I could sleep too—it would stop me from thinking. Come to think of it, I am feeling sleepy."
"Please you, sir, It seldom visits sorrow. When it doth, It is a comforter.","In that case you should sleep. People in grief need a good sleep. It doesn’t come to them often, but when it does come they should enjoy it."
"We two, my lord, Will guard your person while you take your rest And watch your safety.","The two of us will guard you while you sleep, my lord, and keep you safe."
Thank you. Wondrous heavy.,Thank you. I’m terribly sleepy.
What a strange drowsiness possesses them!,How strange that they all got so sleepy!
It is the quality o' th' climate.,There must be something in the air here.
Why Doth it not then our eyelids sink? I find not Myself disposed to sleep.,So why aren’t our eyelids heavy? I’m not sleepy at all.
"Nor I. My spirits are nimble. They fell together all, as by consent. Worthy Sebastian, O, what might—? No more.— And yet methinks I see it in thy face, What thou shouldst be. Th' occasion speaks thee, and My strong imagination sees a crown","Me neither. I’m wide awake. They all fell asleep together, as if they’d planned it. Like they’d all been struck by lightning. What might happen, Sebastian, what might happen if—No, it’s time for me to shut up.— But still, I think I can see in your face what you ought to be. Opportunity’s knocking for you, and in my imagination I see a crown dropping onto your head."
"What, art thou waking?",Are you dreaming or awake?
Do you not hear me speak?,Don’t you hear me speaking?
"I do, and surely It is a sleepy language, and thou speak’st Out of thy sleep. What is it thou didst say? This is a strange repose, to be asleep And yet so fast asleep.","I do, and it sounds like you’re talking in your sleep. What did you say? It’s weird for you to be dreaming with your eyes wide open—standing, talking, moving, but sound asleep."
"Noble Sebastian, Thou let’st thy fortune sleep—die, rather—wink’st Whiles thou art waking.","Good Sebastian, you’re the one who’s sleeping if you let this opportunity pass you by without acting on it."
Thou dost snore distinctly. There’s meaning in thy snores.,"You’re snoring, but it sounds like you’re talking. There’s meaning in your snoring."
"Must be so too if heed me, which to do Trebles thee o'er.","I’m not kidding when I say this, I’m not joking around like usual. You should be serious too when you listen to what I’m saying. You can become a great man if you listen to me."
"Well, I am standing water.",I’m hanging on every word you say.
I’ll teach you how to flow.,You need to do more than hang around—you have to act. I’ll show you how.
Do so. To ebb Hereditary sloth instructs me.,You need to. I’m lazy by nature.
"Oh, Whiles thus you mock it! How, in stripping it, You more invest it! Ebbing men indeed Most often do so near the bottom run By their own fear or sloth.","Oh, if you only knew how close to success you are, even while you make fun of what I’m telling you! The more you joke about it, the more clearly I feel how serious it is! Lazy people end up at the bottom, and you deserve to be at the top."
"Prithee, say on. A matter from thee, and a birth indeed Which throes thee much to yield.","Please, tell me more. There’s something in your expression that tells me you have something serious to say, and you’re having a lot of difficulty saying it."
"Thus, sir: Although this lord of weak remembrance—this, Who shall be of as little memory (For he’s a spirit of persuasion only, Professes to persuade) the king his son’s alive, 'Tis as impossible that he’s undrowned And he that sleeps here swims.","This is what I’m saying. (points at GONZALO) Although this lord who has such a bad memory—and who will be forgotten by the world when he’s dead and buried—almost succeeded in convincing the king that his son’s alive, it’s impossible that he survived. It’s as far from the truth as saying this sleeping man is swimming."
I have no hope,"Yes, I’m sure he’s dead. I’ve got no hope that he survived."
"Oh, out of that “no hope” What great hope have you! No hope that way is Another way so high a hope that even Ambition cannot pierce a wink beyond, But doubt discovery there. Will you grant with me","But in that “no hope” there are great hopes for you! That “no hope” means you’re on the way to glory so brilliant you couldn’t even imagine it, no matter how ambitious you were. Do you agree that Ferdinand must have drowned?"
He’s gone.,He’s dead.
"Then, tell me, Who’s the next heir of Naples?","So, in that case, tell me who’s next in line to inherit the kingdom of Naples?"
Claribel.,"Claribel, his daughter."
"She that is Queen of Tunis; she that dwells Ten leagues beyond man’s life; she that from Naples Can have no note, unless the sun were post— Be rough and razorable; she that from whom We all were sea-swallowed, though some cast again, And by that destiny to perform an act Whereof what’s past is prologue, what to come","The one who’s now Queen of Tunis, living at the edge of the world, out of reach of mail service. It takes a letter longer to reach her than it takes a baby boy to grow old enough to shave. Claribel who was the cause of our shipwreck, which a few of us survived—she was destined to give us an opportunity that we are destined to act on."
"What stuff is this? How say you? 'Tis true, my brother’s daughter’s Queen of Tunis, So is she heir of Naples, ’twixt which regions There is some space.","What in the world are you talking about? It’s true that my brother’s daughter is Queen of Tunis, and heir of Naples. And it’s true those two places are far apart."
"A space whose every cubit Seems to cry out, “How shall that Claribel","So far that every foot of distance between them seems to shout, “It’s too far for Claribel to come back to Naples. Let her stay in Tunis and give Sebastian a"
"And let Sebastian wake.” Say this were death That now hath seized them. Why, they were no worse Than now they are. There be that can rule Naples As well as he that sleeps, lords that can prate As this Gonzalo. I myself could make A chough of as deep chat. Oh, that you bore The mind that I do, what a sleep were this For your advancement! Do you understand me?","chance to start living.” If these sleeping men were dead instead of sleeping, they’d be no worse off than they are now. There are a lot of men who can rule Naples just as well as this sleeping guy here can. There are a lot of men who babble nonsense as well as Gonzalo. I could do it myself. Oh, I wish you understood what I’m saying—you’d see how you’re missing out on a great opportunity for yourself! Do you even get what I’m saying?"
Methinks I do.,I think I do.
And how does your content Tender your own good fortune?,And does this prospect of good fortune make you happy?
I remember You did supplant your brother Prospero.,I remember you took the throne from your brother Prospero.
"True. And look how well my garments sit upon me, Much feater than before. My brother’s servants","Yes I did, and look how good I look in my new role—much better than before. My brother’s servants used to be my equals. Now they work for me."
"But, for your conscience?",But what about your guilty conscience?
"Ay, sir. Where lies that? If ’twere a kibe, 'Twould put me to my slipper. But I feel not This deity in my bosom. Twenty consciences, And melt ere they molest! Here lies your brother, No better than the earth he lies upon, If he were that which now he’s like—that’s dead— Whom I, with this obedient steel, three inches of it, To the perpetual wink for aye might put This ancient morsel, this Sir Prudence, who","Yes. What guilty conscience? I don’t feel anything. If my feet were cold, I’d put my slippers on, but I don’t feel any pangs of guilt. If there were twenty guilty consciences between me and the dukedom, they’d melt away to nothing before they caused me any trouble. Here’s your brother sleeping, worth no more than the dirt he’s lying on. If he were as dead as he appears to be now—and I could quickly make him dead with this sword of mine—he wouldn’t stand in our way. As"
"Should not upbraid our course. For all the rest, They’ll take suggestion as a cat laps milk. We say befits the hour.","for the other men, we can make them believe anything we choose. They’ll set their watches to whatever time we say."
"Thy case, dear friend, Shall be my precedent. As thou got’st Milan, I’ll come by Naples. Draw thy sword. One stroke Shall free thee from the tribute which thou payest.","You’ll be my role model. Just as you got Milan, I’ll get Naples. Take out your sword. With one cut you can be through paying money to Naples. And as king I’ll love you forever."
"Draw together. And when I rear my hand, do you the like, To fall it on Gonzalo.","You take out your sword too. When I raise my hand, you do the same, and bring it down on Gonzalo’s head."
"O, but one word. (speaks quietly to ANTONIO)","Oh, but there’s one more thing to tell you. (he speaks quietly to ANTONIO)"
"(to GONZALO) My master through his art foresees the danger For else his project dies—to keep them living. (sings in GONZALO ’s ear) While you here do snoring lie, Open-eyed conspiracy His time doth take. If of life you keep a care, Shake off slumber and beware. Awake, awake!","(to GONZALO) With his magic powers my master can see the dangers that you are in, my friend. So he sent me to make sure these men survive—and to guarantee his plans succeed. (sings in GONZALO ’s ear) While you lie here snoring, Men are plotting against you. If you want to stay alive, Wake up and beware. Wake up, wake up!"
Then let us both be sudden.,Let’s act quickly.
(waking and seeing them),(waking and seeing them) God help the king! Save him!
"(waking) Why, how now? Ho, awake!","(waking up) Hey, what’s this, what’s going on? Wake up!"
Why are you drawn? Wherefore this ghastly looking?,Why are your swords out? Why do you look like that?
What’s the matter?,What’s this all about?
"Whiles we stood here securing your repose, Like bulls, or rather lions. Did ’t not wake you? It struck mine ear most terribly.","While we were here guarding you as you slept, we heard a loud roar that sounded like bulls, or lions. Didn’t you hear it? We heard it very clearly."
I heard nothing.,I didn’t hear anything.
"Oh, ’twas a din to fright a monster’s ear, To make an earthquake! Sure, it was the roar","Oh, it was a monstrous roar, to make the earth tremble! I’m sure there was a herd of lions nearby."
"Heard you this, Gonzalo?","Did you hear this, Gonzalo?"
"Upon mine honor, sir, I heard a humming, And that a strange one too, which did awake me. I shaked you, sir, and cried. As mine eyes opened, I saw their weapons drawn. There was a noise, Or that we quit this place. Let’s draw our weapons.","It’s true I heard a humming sound, a strange one, which woke me up. I shook you and shouted at you, sir. When I opened my eyes, I saw their swords out. There was a noise, that’s certainly true. We should either be on guard here constantly or move to a different camp. Let’s draw our own swords too."
"Lead off this ground, and let’s make further search For my poor son.",Lead us away from this area. We can search for my poor son while we’re at it.
"Heavens keep him from these beasts! For he is, sure, i' th' island.",I hope those lions stay far away from him. I’m sure he’s somewhere on the island.
Lead away.,Get us out of here.
"So, King, go safely on to seek thy son.","(to himself) My lord Prospero will know what I’ve done. So go ahead, King, and look for your son."
"All the infections that the sun sucks up From bogs, fens, flats, on Prosper fall and make him By inchmeal a disease! His spirits hear me And yet I needs must curse. But they’ll nor pinch, Nor lead me like a firebrand in the dark Out of my way, unless he bid 'em. But For every trifle are they set upon me, Sometime like apes that mow and chatter at me, Lie tumbling in my barefoot way and mount Their pricks at my footfall. Sometime am I All wound with adders who with cloven tongues Do hiss me into madness.","I hope all the diseases that breed in swamps and marshes infect Prospero, inch by inch, until he’s nothing but a walking disease! His spirits are listening to me, but I can’t help cursing him anyway. They won’t pinch me, frighten me, push me in the mud, or mislead me unless he tells them to. But he sends them to punish me for every little thing. Sometimes his spirits take the form of apes, grimacing and chattering at me and then biting me; sometimes they come like porcupines, my feet as I walk. Sometimes snakes wrap around me, hissing at me with their forked tongues till I go crazy."
"Lo, now, lo! For bringing wood in slowly. I’ll fall flat. Perchance he will not mind me. (lies down, covered by his gaberdine)","Hey, look over there! Here comes one of his spirits to torture me for taking so long to bring the wood back. I’ll lie down and hide. Maybe he won’t see me. (he lies down and covers himself with his cloak)"
Here’s neither bush nor shrub to bear off any weather at all.,There are no bushes or shrubs to protect me from the weather here. And there’s another storm brewing—I can hear it in the way the wind whistles. That huge black cloud over there looks like a filthy liquor jug that’s about to pour out its contents. It won’t be able to help pouring rain down by the bucket-full. (he sees CALIBAN)
"What have we here? A man or a fish? Dead or alive? A fish. He smells like a fish, a very ancient and fish-like smell, a kind of not-of-the-newest poor-john. A strange fish! Were I in England now, as once I was, and had but this fish painted, not a holiday fool there but would give a piece of silver. There would this monster make a man. Any strange beast there makes a man. When they will not give a doit to relieve a lame beggar, they will lay out ten to see a dead Indian. Legged like a man and his fins like arms! Warm, o' my troth. I do now let loose my opinion, hold it no longer: this is no fish, but an islander that hath lately suffered by a thunderbolt.","What do we have here, a man or a fish? Whew, he stinks like a fish—an old salted fish, not a fresh-caught one. A strange fish. If I were in England now, like I was once, and I had even a painted picture of this fish, every fool there would give me a piece of silver to look at it. In England this strange monster would be just like a man. Any strange beast there can be considered a man. The men there won’t give a penny to a lame beggar, but they’ll pay ten cents to look at a freak show exhibit. This guy has legs like a man but fins for arms! And he’s still warm, by God. I guess this is not a fish, but a native who got struck by lightning just now."
"Alas, the storm is come again! My best way is to creep under his gaberdine. There is no other shelter hereabouts. Misery acquaints a man with strange bedfellows. I will here shroud till the dregs of the storm be past. (crawls under gaberdine)","Oh, here comes the storm again. The best thing to do is crawl under his cloak. There’s no other shelter around here. In emergencies you meet the strangest folks. I’ll just stay here till the storm passes. (he crawls under CALIBAN ’s cloak)"
"(sings) I shall no more to sea, to sea, Here shall I die ashore— Well, here’s my comfort. (drinks, sings) The master, the swabber, the boatswain, and I, The gunner and his mate Loved Mall, Meg, and Marian, and Margery, But none of us cared for Kate. For she had a tongue with a tang,","(sings) I’ll never go to sea again, I’ll die here on shore— This is a rotten song to sing at a man’s funeral. At least I’ve got some booze to comfort me. (he drinks and sings) The master, the deck-washer, the boatswain, and I, The gunman and his friend, We loved Moll, Meg, Marian, and Margery But none of us cared for Kate. Kate had a gutter mouth,"
"Would cry to a sailor, “Go hang!” She loved not the savor of tar nor of pitch, Yet a tailor might scratch her where'er she did itch. Then to sea, boys, and let her go hang! This is a scurvy tune too. But here’s my comfort.","And would shout to sailors, “Go to hell!” She didn’t like ship smells like tar, But liked it okay when a tailor took her to bed. So go to sea, boys, and let her go to hell! That’s a rotten song too. But here’s something to comfort me."
Do not torment me. Oh!,Don’t hurt me. Oh!
"What’s the matter? Have we devils here? Do you put tricks upon ’s with savages and men of Ind, ha? I have not ’scaped drowning to be afeard now of your four legs. Or it hath been said, “As proper a man as ever went on four legs cannot make him give ground,” and it shall be said so again while Stephano breathes at' nostrils.","What’s going on? Do we have devils on the island? Are you playing tricks on me by showing me savages and uncivilized men from the Indies, ha? I didn’t survive a shipwreck so I could be scared of your four legs now. I’ll never run away from any ordinary man who walks on four legs like the rest of us. Stephano speaks nonsense because he is drunk."
The spirit torments me. Oh!,The spirit is torturing me. Oh!
"This is some monster of the isle with four legs who hath got, as I take it, an ague. Where the devil should he learn our language? I will give him some relief if it be but for that. If I can recover him and keep him tame and get to Naples with him, he’s a present for any emperor that ever trod on neat’s leather.","This is some monster of the island, with four legs, who seems to me to have some kind of ache. How the hell does he know our language? I’ll help out, if only because he speaks the same language as me. If I can cure him from his fever and tame him, and get him back to Naples, he’d make a great present for any emperor."
"Do not torment me, prithee. I’ll bring my wood home faster.","Don’t hurt me, please. I promise I’ll carry the wood faster."
"He’s in his fit now and does not talk after the wisest. He shall taste of my bottle. If he have never drunk wine afore, it will go near to remove his fit. If I can recover him and keep him tame, I will not take too much for him. He shall pay for him that hath him, and that soundly.","He’s having a fit and talking nonsense. I’ll give him some liquor. If he’s never drunk it before, it’ll help soothe his fever. If I can tame him, I’ll charge as much as I can get for him. He’ll bring a lot of money to the person who owns him, that’s for sure."
"Thou dost me yet but little hurt. Thou wilt anon, I know it by thy trembling. Now Prosper works upon thee.","You haven’t hurt me much yet, but you will soon, I can tell by your trembling. Prospero sent you here."
"Come on your ways. Open your mouth. Here is that which will give language to you, cat. Open your mouth. This will shake your shaking, I can tell you, and that soundly. You cannot tell who’s your friend. Open your chaps again.","(trying to make CALIBAN drink) Come on, open your mouth. This’ll help you talk. Open up. This’ll stop you from trembling—I can tell you that for sure. (CALIBAN drinks) You don’t even know who your friends are. Open up that mouth again."
"I should know that voice. It should be—But he is drowned, and these are devils. Oh, defend me!","I almost recognize that voice. It’s—But he’s drowned, and these guys are devils. Oh, God help me!"
"Four legs and two voices—a most delicate monster. His forward voice now is to speak well of his friend. His backward voice is to utter foul speeches and to detract. If all the wine in my bottle will recover him, I will help his ague. Come. CALIBAN drinks","Four legs and two voices—a very special monster. One voice speaks well and talks about his friend. The other voice is harsh and abusive. I can charge even more for this. If it takes all the wine in my bottle, I’ll cure him. Come on. CALIBAN drinks That’s good! Now I’ll pour some in your other mouth."
Stephano!,Stephano!
"Doth thy other mouth call me? Mercy, mercy! This is a devil, and no monster. I will leave him. I have no long spoon.","Is your other mouth calling my name? Mercy, mercy! This isn’t a monster, it’s a devil. I’ll leave him alone. I have no interest in getting mixed up with the devil."
"Stephano! If thou beest Stephano, touch me and speak to me. For I am Trinculo—be not afeard—thy good friend Trinculo.","Stephano! If you’re Stephano, touch me and speak to me. I’m Trinculo—don’t be scared—your good friend Trinculo."
"If thou beest Trinculo, come forth. I’ll pull thee by the lesser legs. If any be Trinculo’s legs, these are they. (pulls TRINCULO out from under the gaberdine)","If you’re Trinculo, then come out. I’ll pull on these smaller legs. If any legs here are Trinculo’s, these are. (he pulls TRINCULO out from under the cloak) Well,"
Thou art very Trinculo indeed! How camest thou to be the siege of this mooncalf? Can he vent Trinculos?,"what do you know, you are Trinculo! How did you end up as this monster’s dung? Does he crap Trinculos?"
"I took him to be killed with a thunderstroke. But art thou not drowned, Stephano? I hope now thou art not drowned. Is the storm overblown? I hid me under the dead mooncalf’s gaberdine for fear of the storm. And art thou living, Stephano? O Stephano, two Neapolitans ’scaped! (dances STEPHANO about)","I thought he was dead, struck by lightning. But aren’t you drowned, Stephano? I hope you’re not drowned. Has the storm passed? I hid under this monster’s cloak to get out of the storm. Are you really alive, Stephano? Oh, Stephano, two men from Naples survived! (TRINCULO dances STEPHANO around.)"
"Prithee, do not turn me about. My stomach is not constant.",Please stop turning me around. My stomach’s a little upset.
"(aside) These be fine things, an if they be not sprites. That’s a brave god and bears celestial liquor. I will kneel to him.","(to himself) These are beautiful creatures, if they’re not spirits. He’s a good god, who brings liquor from the heavens. I will worship him."
"(to TRINCULO) How didst thou ’scape? How camest thou hither? Swear by this bottle how thou camest hither. I escaped upon a butt of sack which the sailors heaved o'erboard, by this bottle, which I made of the bark of a tree with mine own hands since I was cast ashore.","(to TRINCULO) How did you survive? How did you get here? Tell me the truth, swear on this bottle of wine. I made it out of tree bark after I washed ashore. I myself floated here on a barrel of wine that the sailors tossed overboard."
"(to STEPHANO) I’ll swear upon that bottle to be thy true subject, for the liquor is not earthly.","(to STEPHANO) I’ll swear by that wine bottle to be your true subject. You must be a god, since your liquor is out of this world."
(to TRINCULO) Here. Swear then how thou escapedst.,"(to TRINCULO) Here. Swear, and tell me how you survived."
"Swum ashore, man, like a duck. I can swim like a duck, I’ll be sworn.","I swam ashore like a duck. I can swim like a duck, I swear."
"Here, kiss the book. Though thou canst swim like a duck, thou art made like a goose.","Here, kiss the Bible Stephano jokingly describes taking a drink from the bottle as “kissing the Bible.” kiss the Bible and swear. You may swim like a duck, but you look more like a goose."
"O Stephano, hast any more of this?","Oh Stephano, do you have any more of that wine?"
"The whole butt, man. My cellar is in a rock by th' seaside where my wine is hid.—How now, mooncalf? How does thine ague?","I’ve got the whole barrel, man. I live in a cave by the seaside, where I keep the barrel hidden.—Hey, monster, how’s your fever?"
Hast thou not dropped from heaven?,"You come from heaven, don’t you?"
"Out o' th' moon, I do assure thee. I was the man i' the moon when time was.","No, from the moon, I’m telling you. I used to be the man in the moon a long time ago."
I have seen thee in her and I do adore thee. My mistress showed me thee and thy dog and thy bush.,"Oh, I’ve seen you in the moon, and I worship you. My mistress showed me you in the moon and your dog and your bush."
"Come, swear to that, kiss the book. I will furnish it anon with new contents, swear.","Come on, swear to it. Kiss the Bible and swear it. I’m going to fill the bottle up again soon."
"By this good light, this is a very shallow monster. I afeard of him! A very weak monster. The man i' th' moon! A most poor credulous monster.—Well drawn, monster, in good sooth!","When you get a good look at him, you see he’s not much of a monster. I can’t believe I was scared of him! A pretty pathetic monster. The man in the moon! What a poor, gullible monster.—That was a nice big gulp, monster!"
"(to STEPHANO) I’ll show thee every fertile inch o' th' island. And I will kiss thy foot. I prithee, be my god.","(to STEPHANO) I’ll show you every inch of the island, and I’ll kiss your feet. I beg you, please be my god."
"By this light, a most perfidious and drunken monster. When ’s god’s asleep, he’ll rob his bottle.","What a lying, drunken monster. When his god falls asleep, the monster will snatch his wine bottle."
(to STEPHANO) I’ll kiss thy foot. I’ll swear myself thy subject.,(to STEPHANO) I’ll kiss your feet. I’ll vow to be your faithful subject.
"Come on then. Down, and swear.","Come on, then. Get down and swear it."
I shall laugh myself to death at this puppy-headed monster. A most scurvy monster. I could find in my heart to beat him—,"I’m going to laugh myself to death over this silly monster. A rotten, foolish monster. I could find it in my heart to beat him—"
"(to CALIBAN) Come, kiss.","Come on, kiss my feet."
But that the poor monster’s in drink. An abominable monster!,Except the poor monster’s drunk. An awful monster!
"I’ll show thee the best springs. I’ll pluck thee berries. I’ll fish for thee and get thee wood enough. A plague upon the tyrant that I serve! I’ll bear him no more sticks, but follow thee,","I’ll show you where to get fresh water. I’ll pick berries for you. I’ll fish for you and get you plenty of firewood. The tyrant I’m serving now can go to hell! I won’t get any more wood for him. I’m serving you now, you wonderful man."
"A most ridiculous monster, to make a wonder of a poor drunkard.","What a silly monster, to think a poor drunk is wonderful."
"(to STEPHANO) I prithee, let me bring thee where crabs grow. And I with my long nails will dig thee pignuts, Show thee a jay’s nest, and instruct thee how To clustering filberts, and sometimes I’ll get thee Young scamels from the rock. Wilt thou go with me?","(to STEPHANO) I beg you, let me show where you can find crabs to eat. I’ll use my long fingernails to dig edible roots for you, find you a bird’s nest, and teach you how to catch a nimble monkey. I’ll take you to clusters of hazelnuts, and sometimes I’ll catch birds for you on the rocks. Will you come with me?"
"I prithee now, lead the way without any more talking.— Trinculo, the king and all our company else being drowned, we will inherit here.—Here, bear my bottle.—Fellow Trinculo, we’ll fill him by and by again.","Show us the way without further delay.—Trinculo, since the king and all our comrades are drowned, we’re the heirs of this place.—Here, carry my wine bottle.—Trinculo, my buddy, we’ll get that bottle refilled soon enough."
"(sings drunkenly) Farewell, master! Farewell, farewell.","(sings drunkenly) Goodbye, master! Goodbye, goodbye."
"A howling monster, a drunken monster.","A loud-mouthed, drunken monster."
" No more dams I’ll make for fish, Nor fetch in firing At requiring, Nor scrape trencher, nor wash dish. 'Ban, 'Ban, Ca-caliban Has a new master. Get a new man. Freedom, high-day, high-day, freedom, freedom, high-day, freedom!","(sings) I won’t build you any more dams to catch fish, Or fetch you firewood when you order me to, Or clean the plates, or wash dishes. 'Ban, 'ban, Ca-caliban Has a new master. So get a new servant. Freedom, what a wonderful day, wonderful day, freedom, freedom, wonderful day, freedom!"
O brave monster! Lead the way.,Good monster! Show us the way.
"There be some sports are painful, and their labor Delight in them sets off. Some kinds of baseness Are nobly undergone. And most poor matters Point to rich ends. This my mean task The mistress which I serve quickens what’s dead And makes my labors pleasures. Oh, she is Ten times more gentle than her father’s crabbed, And he’s composed of harshness. I must remove Upon a sore injunction. My sweet mistress Weeps when she sees me work, and says such baseness Had never like executor. I forget, But these sweet thoughts do even refresh my labors,","Some games are painful, but their discomfort makes them more fun. Some kinds of lowly activities are done for noble reasons. And you can do poor things that lead to rich results. This hard work would be boring and nasty to me, but I’m working for a mistress who makes me enjoy my labor. Oh, she’s ten times nicer than her father is mean, and he’s the height of crabbiness. I have thousands of logs to take away and pile up, on strict orders from him. My sweet darling cries when she sees me work and tells me that such a wonderful man never performed such lowly tasks before. These sweet thoughts relieve me and refresh me, especially when I’m slaving away busily."
"Alas now, pray you, Work not so hard. I would the lightning had Burnt up those logs that you are enjoined to pile! Pray, set it down and rest you. When this burns, 'Twill weep for having wearied you. My father He’s safe for these three hours.","Now, please, I beg you, don’t work so hard. I wish the lightning had burned up all those logs that you’ve been ordered to stack! Please put that log down and rest a while. When this wood burns, it’ll weep for making you tired. My father’s studying hard, so he won’t see you. So please rest. We’re safe from my father for at least three hours."
"O most dear mistress, The sun will set before I shall discharge What I must strive to do.","Oh, my dear mistress, I won’t be able to finish this work until sunset at the earliest."
"If you’ll sit down, I’ll bear your logs the while. Pray, give me that.","If you sit down, I’ll carry your logs a while. Please give me that. I’ll take it over to the pile."
"No, precious creature. I had rather crack my sinews, break my back, Than you should such dishonor undergo While I sit lazy by.","No, my darling, I’d rather strain all my muscles and break my back than let you do work like this while I lounge around nearby."
"It would become me As well as it does you, and I should do it And yours it is against.","I’d be as right for the job as you are, and I’d do it more easily, since I’d have good will on my side."
"(aside)    Poor worm, thou art infected! This visitation shows it.","(to himself) You poor weak thing, you’re in love! I can see it clearly now."
You look wearily.,You look tired.
"No, noble mistress. 'Tis fresh morning with me When you are by at night. I do beseech you— What is your name?","No, noble mistress, I’m as fresh as morning when you’re near me, even at night. I beg you to tell me your name so I can use it in my prayers."
"Miranda.—O my father, I have broke your hest to say so!","Miranda.—Oh father, I’ve disobeyed you by telling him that!"
"Admired Miranda! Indeed the top of admiration, worth What’s dearest to th' world! Full many a lady","Miranda—the very name means “admired!” You are indeed admired, more than anything else in the world! I’ve looked at many ladies with pleasure, and been"
"Th' harmony of their tongues hath into bondage Brought my too diligent ear. For several virtues Have I liked several women. Never any With so full soul but some defect in her And put it to the foil. But you, O you, So perfect and so peerless, are created Of every creature’s best.","seduced by the sweet nothings they said to me. I’ve liked several women for their good qualities, but there was something wrong with each one that blotted her excellent qualities and cancelled them out. But with you it’s different. You’re perfect, without a rival in the world, made up of the best qualities of every creature."
"I do not know One of my sex, no woman’s face remember— More that I may call men than you, good friend, And my dear father. How features are abroad I am skill-less of, but, by my modesty, The jewel in my dower, I would not wish Nor can imagination form a shape Besides yourself to like of. But I prattle Something too wildly, and my father’s precepts I therein do forget.","I’ve never known any woman or seen a woman’s face—except my own in the mirror. And I’ve never met any men besides you and my father. I have no idea what people look like in other places, but I swear by my modesty, which I value above everything else, that I’d never want any companion in the world but you. I can’t even imagine one. But listen to me chattering like crazy, and father always told me not to."
"I am in my condition I would, not so!—and would no more endure This wooden slavery than to suffer The flesh-fly blow my mouth. Hear my soul speak. The very instant that I saw you did To make me slave to it, and for your sake Am I this patient log-man.","I’m a prince by birth, Miranda—maybe even a king now; though I wish I weren’t—and normally I wouldn’t put up with carrying these logs any more than I’d let flies breed in my mouth. But I’ll tell you something from my soul. The second I saw you, my heart rushed to serve you and be your slave, so here I am now, a patient log-man."
Do you love me?,Do you love me?
"O heaven, O earth, bear witness to this sound And crown what I profess with kind event","Oh heaven, oh earth, witness what I’m about to say, and reward me if I tell the truth! If I’m lying, then"
"What best is boded me to mischief! I Beyond all limit of what else i' th' world Do love, prize, honor you.","destroy all my prospects in life! More than anything else in the world, I love you, value you, and honor you."
I am a fool To weep at what I am glad of.,Look at me crying—what a fool I am to cry at what makes me happy.
(aside)     Fair encounter On that which breeds between 'em!,(to himself) What a pleasant meeting between two people truly in love! May heaven bless the feelings growing between them!
Wherefore weep you?,Why are you crying?
"At mine unworthiness, that dare not offer What I desire to give, and much less take And all the more it seeks to hide itself The bigger bulk it shows. Hence, bashful cunning, And prompt me, plain and holy innocence! I am your wife if you will marry me. You may deny me, but I’ll be your servant Whether you will or no.","I’m crying at how unworthy I am to give you what I want to give you and to take what I’m dying to have. But it’s a waste of time to say so. The more I try to hide what I’m feeling, the bigger it gets. Oh, stop being so bashful and tricky, Miranda, just be straightforward and innocent! I’ll be your wife if you’ll have me. Otherwise, I’ll die a virgin, devoted to you. You can refuse to make me your spouse, but I’ll be your servant whether you want me to or not."
"My mistress, dearest, and I thus humble ever.","You’ll be my wife, dearest, and I’ll serve you forever."
"My husband, then?","Will you be my husband, then?"
As bondage e'er of freedom. Here’s my hand.,"Yes, with a heart more eager to bear a husband’s responsibilities than a slave ever wanted freedom. Take my hand, darling."
"And mine, with my heart in ’t. And now farewell Till half an hour hence.","Here’s my hand, and my heart. And now goodbye. I’ll see you again in half an hour."
A thousand thousand!,A million goodbyes to you.
"Who are surprised withal. But my rejoicing At nothing can be more. I’ll to my book, For yet ere supper-time must I perform Much business appertaining.","I can’t be as happy as they are at this moment, but nothing could make me any happier. Now it’s time to get back to my studying, since I have a lot of serious business to take care of before dinner."
"Tell not me. When the butt is out, we will drink water. Not a drop before. Therefore bear up and board 'em.—Servant- monster, drink to me.","Don’t tell me that. When the barrel’s empty, we’ll drink water. Not one drop sooner. Therefore, drink up.—Servant-monster, drink a toast to me."
"“Servant-monster”? The folly of this island. They say there’s but five upon this isle. We are three of them. If th' other two be brained like us, the state totters.","“Servant monster”? What a crazy island this is. They say there are only five people on it. We’re three of them. If the other two are as loopy as we are, our country’s in bad shape."
"Drink, servant-monster, when I bid thee. Thy eyes are almost set in thy head.","Drink when I order you, servant-monster. Your eyes look like they’ve sunk into your head."
"Where should they be set else? He were a brave monster indeed, if they were set in his tail.","Where else should his eyes be, if not in his head? He’d be quite a monster if his eyes were in his tail."
"My man-monster hath drowned his tongue in sack. For my part, the sea cannot drown me. I swam, ere I could recover the shore, five and thirty leagues off and on. By this light, thou shalt be my lieutenant, monster, or my standard.","My man—monster is so drunk he can’t talk. As for me, no liquid can harm me, neither booze nor the whole sea itself. Before I could get to shore, I swam thirty-five leagues league = miles leagues in it and still survived.—Monster, you’ll be my lieutenant, or my flag-bearer."
"Your lieutenant, if you list. He’s no standard.",Lieutenant is better. He’s not standing straight enough to hold a flag.
"We’ll not run, Monsieur Monster.","We’re not going to run in our army, Monsieur Monster."
"Nor go neither. But you’ll lie like dogs, and yet say nothing neither.",Or walk either. You’ll just lie there like sleeping dogs and say nothing.
"Mooncalf, speak once in thy life, if thou beest a good mooncalf.","Monster sweetie, be a good monster and just speak once."
How does thy honor? Let me lick thy shoe. (indicates TRINCULO) I’ll not serve him. He’s not valiant.,How is your Highness? Let me lick your shoe. (he points to TRINCULO) I’ll never serve that guy there. He’s not courageous like you.
"(to CALIBAN) Thou liest, most ignorant monster. I am in case to justle a constable. Why, thou deboshed fish, thou, was there ever man a coward that hath drunk so much sack as I today? Wilt thou tell a monstrous lie, being but half a fish and half a monster?","(to CALIBAN) You’re a liar, you ignorant monster. I’m courageous. I could shake up a police officer right now. You drunken fish, you, how could you call me a coward after all the booze I’ve drunk today? Do you tell such monstrous lies because you’re half fish and half monster?"
(to STEPHANO),"(to STEPHANO) Look how he’s making fun of me! Will you let him talk to me like, my lord?"
"“Lord,” quoth he? That a monster should be such a natural!","“Lord,” he calls you? What an idiot that monster is!"
"(to STEPHANO) Lo, lo, again! Bite him to death, I prithee.","(to STEPHANO) There he goes again! Please, bite him to death, I’m begging you."
"Trinculo, keep a good tongue in your head. If you prove a mutineer, the next tree. The poor monster’s my subject and he shall not suffer indignity.","Trinculo, speak politely. If you mutiny against me, I’ll hang you from the next tree. This poor monster is my subject, and I will not allow him to be insulted."
I thank my noble lord. Wilt thou be pleased to hearken once again to the suit I made to thee?,"Thank you, my noble lord. Now would you please listen once again to the request I made to you earlier?"
"Marry, will I. Kneel and repeat it. I will stand, and so shall","Indeed, I will. Kneel and tell me again. I’ll stand, and so will Trinculo."
"(kneeling) As I told thee before, I am subject to a tyrant, a sorcerer that by his cunning hath cheated me of the island.","(kneeling) As I told you before, I’m enslaved to a tyrant, a magician who tricked me with magic spells and took my island from me."
Thou liest.,You lie.
"(to TRINCULO) Thou liest, thou jesting monkey, thou! I would my valiant master would destroy thee. I do not lie.","(to TRINCULO) You’re the liar, you big fat monkey. I wish my courageous master would kill you. I’m not lying."
"Trinculo, if you trouble him any more in ’s tale, by this hand, I will supplant some of your teeth.","Trinculo, if you interrupt him any more, I swear I’ll knock some teeth out of your head."
"Why, I said nothing.",I didn’t say anything.
"Mum, then, and no more. Proceed.","Okay, just stay quiet. Go on."
"I say, by sorcery he got this isle. From me he got it. If thy greatness will Revenge it on him—for I know thou darest, But this thing dare not—","I was telling you he used witchcraft to take this island. He stole it from me. If your highness is willing, take revenge on him for that—because I know you’re brave enough, I don’t dare to—"
That’s most certain.,That’s for sure.
Thou shalt be lord of it and I’ll serve thee.,"You’ll be lord of the island then, and I’ll be your servant."
How now shall this be compassed? Canst thou bring me to th' party?,And how would we go about doing that? Can you bring me to him?
"Yea, yea, my lord. I’ll yield him thee asleep,","Yes, yes, my lord. I’ll take you to where he sleeps, and you can pound a nail into his head."
Thou liest. Thou canst not.,You lie. You can’t do that.
"What a pied ninny’s this!—Thou scurvy patch!— I do beseech thy greatness, give him blows And take his bottle from him. When that’s gone, Where the quick freshes are.","What an idiot this guy is!—You’re a rotten piece of work!—I beg your highness, beat him up and take his wine bottle from him. When he loses that, he’ll be drinking salt water, since I’ll never tell him where the freshwater springs are."
"Trinculo, run into no further danger. Interrupt the monster one word further, and, by this hand, I’ll turn my mercy out o' doors and make a stockfish of thee.","Trinculo, watch out. If you interrupt this monster with one more word, I’ll beat you like a piece of salted fish."
"Why, what did I? I did nothing. I’ll go farther off.",What did I do? I didn’t do anything. I need to get away from you.
Didst thou not say he lied?,Didn’t you call him a liar?
Thou liest.,You lie.
(to TRINCULO) Do I so? Take thou that. (beats TRINCULO),"(to TRINCULO) Oh, I did? Take that, then. (he beats TRINCULO) If you want more beatings like that, just accuse me of lying again."
"I did not give the lie. Out o' your wits and hearing too? A pox o' your bottle! This can sack and drinking do. A murrain on your monster, and the devil take your fingers!","I didn’t accuse you of lying. Are you out of your mind and deaf too? Damn your wine! This is what happens when you drink too much. Your monster can go to hell, and you can too!"
"Ha, ha, ha!","Ha, ha, ha!"
"Now, forward with your tale.—Prithee, stand farther off.",Now go ahead and tell me the rest of your story.—Please go stand farther away.
"Beat him enough. After a little time, I’ll beat him too.","Beat him up. After a little while, I’ll beat him too."
"Stand farther.—Come, proceed.","Stand farther away.— Come on, continue your story."
"Why, as I told thee, ’tis a custom with him, Having first seized his books; or with a log Batter his skull; or paunch him with a stake; Or cut his weasand with thy knife. Remember First to possess his books, for without them One spirit to command. They all do hate him As rootedly as I. Burn but his books. He has brave utensils—for so he calls them— Which when he has a house, he’ll deck withal. The beauty of his daughter. He himself Calls her a nonpareil. I never saw a woman, But only Sycorax my dam and she. But she as far surpasseth Sycorax","Just as I told you, he usually sleeps in the afternoon. At that time you can smash in his skull after seizing his books; or you can bash his skull with a log; or you can stab him in the belly; or cut his windpipe. Just remember to grab his books first, since without them he’s just a poor fool like me, and can’t command a single spirit. All the spirits hate him as much as I do. Be sure to burn his magic books. He has some wonderful home furnishings—that’s what he calls them—that he’ll use to decorate his house when he gets one. The most important thing for you to think about is how beautiful his daughter is. He says she has no equal. I never saw a woman except her and Sycorax, my mother. But Miranda is so much more beautiful, you can’t even compare the two."
Is it so brave a lass?,Is she really that wonderful?
"Ay, lord. She will become thy bed, I warrant. And bring thee forth brave brood.","Yes, my lord. She’ll look good in your bed, and she’ll produce some fine children too."
"Monster, I will kill this man. His daughter and I will be king and queen—save our graces!—and Trinculo and thyself shall be viceroys.—Dost thou like the plot, Trinculo?","Monster, I’ll kill this man. His daughter and I will be king and queen—God protect us!—and you and Trinculo will be our governors.—Do you like that idea, Trinculo?"
Excellent.,Excellent.
"Give me thy hand. I am sorry I beat thee. But while thou livest, keep a good tongue in thy head.",Give me your hand. I’m sorry I hit you. But try to control your speech.
Within this half hour will he be asleep. Wilt thou destroy him then?,In a half an hour he’ll be asleep. Will you kill him then?
"Ay, on mine honor.","Yes, I swear."
(aside) This will I tell my master.,(to himself) I’ll tell my master this.
Thou makest me merry. I am full of pleasure. You taught me but whilere?,You make me so happy. I’m full of joy. Let’s be light-hearted. Will you sing the tune you taught me just a little while ago?
"At thy request, monster, I will do reason, any reason.— Come on, Trinculo, let us sing. (sings) Flout 'em and scout 'em, And scout 'em and flout 'em. Thought is free.","I’ll do anything you ask, monster, anything reasonable.—Come on, Trinculo, let’s sing. (he sings) Dismiss 'em and ziss 'em And diss 'em and dismiss 'em. Thought is free."
That’s not the tune.,That’s not the tune I had in mind.
What is this same?,What’s this song?
"This is the tune of our catch, played by the picture of Nobody.","That’s the melody, played by Nobody."
"If thou beest a man, show thyself in thy likeness. If thou beest a devil, take ’t as thou list.","(to the invisible musician) If you’re a man, then let us see what you look like. If you’re a devil, then go to hell."
"O, forgive me my sins!","Oh, forgive all my sins!"
He that dies pays all debts.—I defy thee!—Mercy upon us!,Dead men have to pay their debts.—I challenge you!—God help us.
Art thou afeard?,Are you scared?
"No, monster, not I.","No, monster, not me."
"Be not afeard. The isle is full of noises, Sometimes a thousand twangling instruments Will hum about mine ears, and sometime voices That, if I then had waked after long sleep, Will make me sleep again. And then, in dreaming, Ready to drop upon me, that when I waked I cried to dream again.","Don’t be scared. This island is full of noises, strange sounds and sweet melodies that make you feel good and don’t hurt anyone. Sometimes I hear a thousand twanging instruments hum at my ears, and sometimes voices that send me back to sleep even if I had just woken up—and then I dreamed of clouds opening up and dropping such riches on me that when I woke up, I cried because I wanted to dream again."
"This will prove a brave kingdom to me, where I shall have my music for nothing.","This’ll be a wonderful kingdom to live in, where they play music for free."
When Prospero is destroyed.,As soon as you kill Prospero.
That shall be by and by. I remember the story.,That’ll happen soon enough. I remember the plan.
"The sound is going away. Let’s follow it, and after do our work.","The sound is going away. But let’s follow it, and then do our dirty work afterward."
"Lead, monster; we’ll follow. I would I could see this taborer. He lays it on.","Lead us, monster; we’ll follow. I wish I could see this invisible drummer. He really plays well."
"Wilt come? I’ll follow, Stephano.","I’m right behind you, Stephano. Are you coming monster?"
"(to ALONSO) By 'r lakin, I can go no further, sir. My old bones ache. Here’s a maze trod indeed Through forthrights and meanders. By your patience, I needs must rest me.","I swear, I can’t go any further, sir. My old bones are tired. We’re wandering in a maze. If you don’t mind, I need to rest a bit."
"Old lord, I cannot blame thee, To th' dulling of my spirits. Sit down and rest. Even here I will put off my hope and keep it No longer for my flatterer. He is drowned Whom thus we stray to find, and the sea mocks","I can’t blame you, old lord. I’m so tired myself that it’s bringing me down. Sit down and rest. I’m losing hope. The one we’re looking for is dead. We’re searching on land, but he’s lost in the sea. We have to give up and let him go."
(aside to SEBASTIAN) I am right glad that he’s so out of hope. Do not for one repulse forego the purpose That you resolved t' effect.,(speaking so that only SEBASTIAN can hear) I’m glad he’s so depressed. Don’t back out of our plan just because it didn’t work the first time.
(aside to ANTONIO)  The next advantage,"(speaking so that only ANTONIO can hear) The next chance we get, we’ll do the deed."
"(aside to SEBASTIAN) Let it be tonight, For now they are oppressed with travel. They Will not, nor cannot, use such vigilance As when they are fresh.",(speaking so that only SEBASTIAN can hear) Let’s do it tonight. The men are so tired from traveling that they can’t be as careful as they are when they’re fresh.
"(aside to ANTONIO) I say, tonight. No more.","(speaking so that only ANTONIO can hear) Yes, tonight. No more talking about this now."
"What harmony is this? My good friends, hark!","What’s that music? My friends, listen."
Marvelous sweet music!,What marvelous music!
"Give us kind keepers, heavens! What were these?",Heaven help us! What were those things?
"A living drollery. Now I will believe There is one tree, the phoenix' throne, one phoenix At this hour reigning there.","A puppet show in real life. Now I’ll believe that unicorns exist, and that there’s a tree in Arabia where the phoenix lives."
"I’ll believe both And what does else want credit, come to me, And I’ll be sworn ’tis true. Travelers ne'er did lie,","Me too. And anything else that’s hard to believe, just ask me and I’ll swear it’s true. Travelers have never told lies, no matter what the fools at home accuse them of."
"If in Naples I should report this now, would they believe me? If I should say, I saw such islanders— For, certes, these are people of the island— Who, though they are of monstrous shape, yet note, Our human generation you shall find Many—nay, almost any.","If I told them about this back in Naples, would they believe me? I’d tell them that I saw natives like these—since they must be natives—who are graceful and well-mannered even if they’re monstrous to look at, kinder than most human beings you might find— kinder than almost any human."
"(aside)  Honest lord, Thou hast said well, for some of you there present Are worse than devils.","(to himself) My good lord, you’re absolutely right, since some of you are worse than devils."
"I cannot too much muse Although they want the use of tongue, a kind Of excellent dumb discourse.","I can’t stop being amazed by these shapes, sounds, and gestures, which express, even without saying anything, a wonderful kind of silent language."
(aside)   Praise in departing.,(to himself) Time to go.
They vanished strangely.,They vanished strangely.
"No matter, since They have left their viands behind, for we have stomachs.","It’s all right, since they left their food behind, and we’re hungry. Would you like to taste the banquet?"
Not I.,Not me.
"Faith, sir, you need not fear. When we were boys, Who would believe that there were mountaineers Dewlapped like bulls, whose throats had hanging at 'em Whose heads stood in their breasts?—which now we find Each putter-out of five for one will bring us Good warrant of.","I assure you, sir, there’s nothing to be afraid of. When we were boys, who’d believe that there were mountain people with rolls of skin around their necks, with their throats hanging down? Or that there were men with heads in their chests?—Nowadays travelers commonly report that these things exist."
"I will stand to and feed, Although my last. No matter, since I feel Stand to and do as we.","I’ll start eating, even if this is my last supper. It’s all right, since the best part of my life was over anyway. Brother, Duke, please have some food."
"(to ALONSO, ANTONIO, and SEBASTIAN ) You are three men of sin, whom Destiny, That hath to instrument this lower world Hath caused to belch up you—and on this island Where man doth not inhabit, you ’mongst men Being most unfit to live. I have made you mad, And even with suchlike valor men hang and drown You fools, I and my fellows Are ministers of fate. The elements Of whom your swords are tempered may as well Wound the loud winds or with bemocked-at stabs Kill the still-closing waters as diminish Are like invulnerable. If you could hurt, Your swords are now too massy for your strengths And will not be uplifted. But remember— For that’s my business to you—that you three Exposed unto the sea, which hath requit it, Him and his innocent child. For which foul deed The powers—delaying, not forgetting—have Incensed the seas and shores, yea, all the creatures, They have bereft, and do pronounce by me Lingering perdition, worse than any death Can be at once, shall step by step attend You and your ways; whose wraths to guard you from— Upon your heads—is nothing but hearts' sorrow And a clear life ensuing.","(to ALONSO, ANTONIO, and SEBASTIAN) The three of you are sinners, and Destiny made the sea belch you up onto this island—where no men live, since none of you deserve to live. I’ve driven you crazy, and many mad people are driven to kill themselves in desperation. (some of the courtiers draw their swords) Listen, you fools, my fellow harpies A harpy is a mythological creature with a woman’s face and breasts and the wings and claws of a bird. Shakespeare apparently intended to have Ariel appear together with two other harpies. harpies and I carry out Fate’s orders. Your swords are useless against us—you’d be more successful swinging them at the empty air, or stabbing at water, than trying to cut off even one of my feathers. My two companions are just as invulnerable as I am. Even if you had the power to hurt us, you’d find your swords far too heavy to lift. But remember—and it’s my job to remind you of this—that in Milan the three of you stole Prospero’s throne and threw him and his innocent child into the sea, which has now taken revenge on you. To punish you for this horrible crime, the higher powers—delaying their punishment, not forgetting about it—have stirred up the seas and all the creatures of earth against you.—They’ve taken your only son from you, Alonso, and they’ve ordered me to destroy you slowly, in a way worse than sudden death could ever be. I’ll stay with you every step of your way. The only way to protect yourselves from the angry higher powers—which are ready to fall upon your head on this empty island—is for you to be sincerely sorry in your hearts for what you’ve done, and to live innocent lives from this time forward."
"(aside) Bravely the figure of this harpy hast thou Performed, my Ariel. A grace it had, devouring. In what thou hadst to say.—So with good life And observation strange, my meaner ministers Their several kinds have done. My high charms work And these mine enemies are all knit up And in these fits I leave them while I visit Young Ferdinand, whom they suppose is drowned, And his and mine loved darling.","(to himself) You’ve played the role of harpy very well, my Ariel. You were fierce but graceful. You said everything I told you to say.—In the same lifelike way, and with the same attention to detail, my lower-ranking servants have done what they were supposed to do. My magic powers are all in full swing, and my enemies are confused and running around in circles. They’re under my control, and I’m keeping them in their crazy fits while I go visit Ferdinand, whom they think has drowned, and the young woman he and I both love."
"(to ALONSO) I' th' name of something holy, sir, why stand you","(to ALONSO) For the love of God, sir, why are you standing here staring into space like this?"
"Oh, it is monstrous, monstrous. Methought the billows spoke and told me of it, The winds did sing it to me, and the thunder, That deep and dreadful organ pipe, pronounced The name of Prosper. It did bass my trespass. I’ll seek him deeper than e'er plummet sounded And with him there lie mudded.","Oh, it’s horrible, horrible. I thought the clouds were talking to me, the winds were singing to me, and the thunder, like an awful organ pipe, roared Prospero’s name. It sang about my crimes. Because of my crimes my son is dead on the ocean floor. I’ll go join him there, going down deeper than any anchor ever sank, and lie with him dead in the mud."
"But one fiend at a time, I’ll fight their legions o'er.","I’ll fight every one of these devils if I have to, one at a time."
I’ll be thy second.,I’ll back you up.
"All three of them are desperate. Their great guilt, Now 'gins to bite the spirits. I do beseech you That are of suppler joints, follow them swiftly And hinder them from what this ecstasy May now provoke them to.","All three of them are crazy with despair. Their guilt is finally starting to gnaw at them, like a slow-acting poison. Those of you who are young and active, I beg you to follow them and keep them from doing the crazy things their guilt might push them to do."
"Follow, I pray you.","Follow them, please."
"(to FERDINAND) If I have too austerely punished you, Your compensation makes amends, for I Have given you here a third of mine own life— Or that for which I live—who once again Were but my trials of thy love and thou Hast strangely stood the test. Here, afore heaven, I ratify this my rich gift. O Ferdinand, Do not smile at me that I boast of her, And make it halt behind her.","(to FERDINAND) If I’ve punished you too harshly, I’m ready to make it up to you now, since I’ve given you a third of my life—everything I live for—my daughter Miranda. I put her in your hands. All the trouble I put you through was to test your love for her, and you’ve passed the test remarkably well. As heaven is my witness, I give you this valuable gift. Oh Ferdinand, don’t smile at me for bragging about Miranda, for you’ll see soon enough that she outshines any praise of her."
 I do believe it Against an oracle.,I’d believe it even if oracles An oracle is someone who delivers messages from the gods. oracles told me differently.
"Then as my gift and thine own acquisition Worthily purchased, take my daughter. But All sanctimonious ceremonies may With full and holy rite be ministered, No sweet aspersion shall the heavens let fall To make this contract grow, but barren hate, The union of your bed with weeds so loathly That you shall hate it both. Therefore take heed, As Hymen’s lamps shall light you.","Then take my daughter, both as my gift to you and as something you have earned. But if you have sex with her before the marriage ceremony takes place, the heavens will not bless your relationship, but will overwhelm you with hate, contempt, and discord, and will poison your marriage bed so that you both grow to loathe it. So be careful, and make sure you respect the holy institution of marriage."
"As I hope For quiet days, fair issue, and long life, The most opportune place, the strong’st suggestion, Our worser genius can shall never melt Mine honor into lust to take away The edge of that day’s celebration Or night kept chained below.","I want peace, good kids, and a long life. To protect the love I cherish, I won’t be tempted by any opportunity to forget my honor and give in to lust. I refuse to give up the joys of my wedding day, when I’ll be so eager for my first night of love that I’ll wonder whether evening will ever come."
"Fairly spoke. Sit then and talk with her. She is thine own.— What, Ariel! My industrious servant, Ariel!","You’ve said it well. So have a seat and talk to her. She’s yours.—Come, Ariel! My trusty servant, Ariel!"
What would my potent master? Here I am.,What does my powerful master wish for? I’m here.
"Did worthily perform, and I must use you In such another trick. Go bring the rabble, O'er whom I give thee power, here to this place. Incite them to quick motion, for I must Some vanity of mine art. It is my promise, And they expect it from me.","You and your fellow spirits did your last assignment well, and now I need your help again. Go bring them all here; I give you power over them. Make them act quickly. I have to give this young couple here a small display of my magic powers. I’ve promised them I would, and they’re expecting it."
Presently?,Right now?
"Ay, with a twink.","Yes, right away."
"Before you can say “Come” and “Go,” Each one, tripping on his toe,","Before you can say “Come” and “Go,” And breathe twice, and shout “So, so!” Each one of your servants will rush here,"
"Will be here with mop and mow. Do you love me, master, no?","Tripping over his own toes, making funny faces. Do you love me, master? No?"
Dearly my delicate Ariel. Do not approach,"I love you dearly, Ariel. Don’t come near till you hear me call you."
"Well, I conceive.","All right, I understand."
"(to FERDINAND) Look thou be true. Do not give dalliance Too much the rein. The strongest oaths are straw To th' fire i' th' blood. Be more abstemious, Or else, goodnight your vow.","(to FERDINAND) Make sure you behave honorably. Don’t go too far with her. If you let yourself get stirred up, you’ll forget your promise of good behavior. Calm yourself down or you’ll forget your vow."
"I warrant you, sir, Abates the ardor of my liver.","I assure you, sir, the tender love I feel in my heart is stronger than the sexual passions stirring down below."
"Well.— Now come, my Ariel! Bring a corollary, Rather than want a spirit. Appear and pertly!—","Good.—Now come, Ariel! Better to have an extra servant on hand than be understaffed. Appear before me now quickly—"
No tongue. All eyes! Be silent.,No talking. Just watch! Be quiet.
"Of wheat, rye, barley, vetches, oats, and peas; Thy turfy mountains, where live nibbling sheep, And flat meads thatched with stover, them to keep; Thy banks with pionèd and twillèd brims,","I am the rainbow-bearing messenger sent by my mistress Juno—the Queen of the Sky. I have come to announce that Juno has asked you, Ceres, goddess of the fields and the earth, to leave your rich farms of wheat, rye, barley, oats, and peas, the hills where the"
"To make cold nymphs chaste crowns; and thy broom groves, Whose shadow the dismissèd bachelor loves, Being lass-lorn; thy pole-clipped vineyard; And thy sea-marge, sterile and rocky hard, Whose watery arch and messenger am I, Bids thee leave these, and with her sovereign grace,","sheep nibble, the furrows that April covers with flowers for nymphs to make crowns with. You must leave the groves where the disappointed bachelor lurks, rejected by his love, and the well-pruned vineyards, and the rocky seashore."
"Here on this grass plot, in this very place, To come and sport. Her peacocks fly amain.","You must leave these places and hurry here to this grassy spot, to entertain Juno."
"Hail, many-colored messenger, that ne'er Dost disobey the wife of Jupiter; Who with thy saffron wings upon my flowers Diffusest honey drops, refreshing showers; My bosky acres and my unshrubbed down, Rich scarf to my proud earth. Why hath thy queen Summoned me hither to this short-grassed green?","Greetings to you, rainbow messenger, who never disobeys Juno, wife of Jupiter; with your golden wings you sprinkle dewdrops and refreshing showers on my flowers, and arch your colored bow over my wooded fields and grassy meadows, like a beautiful scarf to decorate my earth. Why has your queen, Juno, called me here to this grassy spot?"
"A contract of true love to celebrate, On the blessed lovers.","To celebrate a marriage of true love, and give a gift to the lovers."
"Tell me, heavenly bow, If Venus or her son, as thou dost know, Do now attend the queen? Since they did plot The means that dusky Dis my daughter got, I have forsworn.","Tell me, rainbow, do you know if either Venus, the goddess of love, or her son, Cupid, is accompanying Queen Juno? Ever since Venus and her blind son plotted a way for the god of the underworld to steal my daughter away for half the year, I swore I’d never speak to them again."
"Of her society Be not afraid. I met her deity Cutting the clouds towards Paphos, and her son Dove-drawn with her. Here thought they to have done Whose vows are that no bed-right shall be paid Till Hymen’s torch be lighted—but in vain. Mars’s hot minion is returned again. Her waspish-headed son has broke his arrows, And be a boy right out.","Don’t be afraid of her company. I met Venus as she was with her son on her way to her home on Paphos, in a carriage pulled by doves. They were planning to pull a mischievous trick on Ferdinand and Miranda, who have sworn not to sleep together till their wedding day. But their trick failed. Venus went home again, and her little son broke all his arrows, swearing he’ll never shoot them again, but play with birds like other little boys."
"Highest queen of state, Great Juno, comes. I know her by her gait.",Great Queen Juno is coming. I know her by her walk.
"How does my bounteous sister? Go with me To bless this twain that they may prosperous be,","How is my generous sister? Come help me bless this couple, so they will be prosperous and have many children."
"(sings) Honor, riches, marriage, blessing, Long continuance, and increasing, Hourly joys be still upon you. Juno sings her blessings on you.","(singing) May honor, riches, marriage blessings, Long life, and unending joys come to you. Juno sings her blessings onto you."
"(sings) Earth’s increase, foison plenty, Barns and garners never empty, Vines and clustering bunches growing, Plants with goodly burden bowing— Spring come to you at the farthest In the very end of harvest. Scarcity and want shall shun you. Ceres' blessing so is on you.","(singing) Growing crops and large harvests, Barns and silos full of grain, Vines heavy with clustered grapes, Plants straining under their fruit— May spring follow directly autumn’s harvest, With none of winter’s hardships to endure, You will have plenty and want nothing, Ceres’s blessings on you."
"This is a most majestic vision, and Harmonious charmingly. May I be bold",This is a majestic and harmonious vision. Are these spirits we see before us?
"Spirits, which by mine art I have from their confines called to enact My present fancies.","Yes, they’re spirits that I’ve called out of their prisons to perform my whims."
Let me live here ever. So rare a wondered father and a wife Makes this place paradise.,Let me live here forever. Such a wonderful father-in-law and wife make this place a paradise.
"Sweet now, silence. There’s something else to do. Hush and be mute, Or else our spell is marred.","Now be quiet. Juno and Ceres are whispering about something serious. There’s something else to be done. Be silent, or else my magic spell will be broken."
"You nymphs, called naiads of the windring brooks, With your sedged crowns and ever-harmless looks, Answer your summons, Juno does command.","You nymphs who live in the wandering brooks, with seaweed crowns and innocent looks, step out of the water and come join us here on this grassy field. Juno"
"Come, temperate nymphs, and help to celebrate A contract of true love. Be not too late.","orders you. Come, sweet nymphs, and help us celebrate the wedding of two true lovers. Don’t be late."
"You sunburnt sicklemen of August weary, Make holiday. Your rye-straw hats put on, And these fresh nymphs encounter every one In country footing.","Now, you tanned fieldworkers who are so tired of August’s labors, get out of the dirt and come rejoice with us here. Put your straw hats on, have some fun, and dance with these young nymphs."
"I had forgot that foul conspiracy Against my life. The minute of their plot Is almost come.—Well done. Avoid, no more!","I almost forgot about Caliban’s horrible conspiracy to kill me. The moment they planned to act is almost here. (to the spirits)—Good job. Leave now, no more!"
(to MIRANDA) This is strange. Your father’s in some passion That works him strongly.,(to MIRANDA) This is strange. Something has really upset your father.
Never till this day,I’ve never seen him like this. He’s never been as angry and upset as he is now.
"(to FERDINAND) You do look, my son, in a moved sort, As if you were dismayed. Be cheerful, sir. Our revels now are ended. These our actors, As I foretold you, were all spirits and","(to FERDINAND) You look like something’s bothering you. Cheer up. Our music-and-dance spectacle is over. These actors were all spirits, as I told you, and they’ve all melted into thin air. And just like the whole empty"
"And like the baseless fabric of this vision, The cloud-capped towers, the gorgeous palaces, The solemn temples, the great globe itself— Yea, all which it inherit—shall dissolve, Leave not a rack behind. We are such stuff As dreams are made on, and our little life Is rounded with a sleep. Sir, I am vexed. Bear with my weakness. My old brain is troubled. If you be pleased, retire into my cell And there repose. A turn or two I’ll walk To still my beating mind.","and ungrounded vision you’ve seen, with its towers topped with clouds, its gorgeous palaces, solemn temples, the world itself—and everyone living in it—which will dissolve just as this illusory pageant has dissolved, leaving not even a wisp of cloud behind. We are all made of dreams, and our life stretches from sleep before birth to sleep after death. Sir, I’m upset. Please put up with my weakness. My old brain is troubled. Don’t be disturbed by my illness. If you like, you can rest a while in my room. I’ll go for a short walk to calm down my feverish mind."
We wish your peace.,We hope you feel better and find some peace.
"Come with a thought. I thank thee, Ariel. Come.","Come, Ariel—I summon you with a thought. Thank you, Ariel. Come."
Thy thoughts I cleave to. What’s thy pleasure?,I obey all your thoughts. What do you wish?
"Spirit, We must prepare to meet with Caliban.","Spirit, we have to get ready to meet with Caliban."
"Ay, my commander. When I presented Ceres, I thought to have told thee of it, but I feared","Yes, my master. When I was putting on the Ceres show, I thought of reminding you about Caliban, but I was afraid of upsetting you."
"Say again, where didst thou leave these varlets?","Tell me again, where did you leave those lowlifes?"
"I told you, sir, they were red-hot with drinking, So full of valor that they smote the air For breathing in their faces, beat the ground Towards their project. Then I beat my tabor, At which, like unbacked colts, they pricked their ears, Advanced their eyelids, lifted up their noses As they smelt music. So I charmed their ears Toothed briers, sharp furzes, pricking gorse, and thorns, Which entered their frail shins. At last I left them I' th' filthy-mantled pool beyond your cell, There dancing up to th' chins, that the foul lake","I told you, sir, they were totally drunk, so puffed up with courage that they were getting angry at the air for blowing in their faces, and beating the ground for touching their feet—yet even when drunk, they kept their plan firmly in mind. Then I beat my drum, at which point they pricked up their ears and opened their eyes, looking around for the source of my music. I enchanted them so thoroughly that they followed me through thorn bushes and prickly shrubs that tore up their shins. In the end I left them standing in the smelly pond behind your room, with the stinking water covering them up to their chins."
"This was well done, my bird. Thy shape invisible retain thou still. The trumpery in my house, go bring it hither For stale to catch these thieves.","Good job, my little one. Stay invisible. Bring the fancy clothes out of my house, to use as bait to catch these thieves."
"I go, I go.","I’m going, I’m going."
"A devil, a born devil on whose nature Humanely taken, all, all lost, quite lost. And as with age his body uglier grows, So his mind cankers. I will plague them all, Even to roaring.","He’s a devil, a born devil, who can never be trained. All my attempts to help him, undertaken with the best intentions, have been wasted. As his body grows uglier with age, his mind rots away as well. I’ll torment them all till they roar with pain."
"Come, hang them on this line.","Here, hang them on this clothesline."
"Pray you, tread softly, that the blind mole may not hear a foot fall. We now are near his cell.","Please walk softly, so not even a mole hears us approach. We’re near his room now."
"Monster, your fairy, which you say is a harmless fairy, has done little better than played the jack with us.","Hey monster, the spirit you’ve been talking about, the one you call harmless, has been playing tricks on us."
"Monster, I do smell all horse piss, at which my nose is in great indignation.","Monster, I smell like horse piss, which is making my nose pretty upset."
"So is mine.—Do you hear, monster? If I should take a displeasure against you, look you—","Mine too.—Are you listening, monster? If I decide to get angry at you, just watch out—"
Thou wert but a lost monster.,"You’d be done for then, monster."
"Be patient, for the prize I’ll bring thee to Shall hoodwink this mischance. Therefore speak softly. All’s hushed as midnight yet.","My good lord, I still need you to like me. Be patient, because the prize I’m leading you to will make you forget how smelly you are now. So be quiet. It’s as silent as a graveyard here."
"Ay, but to lose our bottles in the pool—","All right, but I can’t get over how we lost our wine bottles in the pond—"
"There is not only disgrace and dishonor in that, monster, but an infinite loss.","Yes, monster, it’s worse than the disgrace of getting drenched and smelly. We lost more than our honor when we lost our wine."
"That’s more to me than my wetting. Yet this is your harmless fairy, monster.","That upsets me much more than getting wet. And you called the fairy creature harmless, monster."
"I will fetch off my bottle, though I be o'er ears for my labor.",I’ll get my bottle back if it’s the last thing I do.
"This is the mouth o' th' cell. No noise, and enter. Do that good mischief which may make this island Thine own for ever, and I, thy Caliban, For aye thy foot-licker.","Please, my king, be quiet. Look here, this is the entrance to his room. Be silent and go in. Do the deed that will make this island yours forever, and will make me, Caliban, your worshipful foot-licker."
Give me thy hand. I do begin to have bloody thoughts.,Give me your hand. I’m starting to feel murderous urges.
"(seeing the apparel) O King Stephano! O peer, O worthy Stephano, look what a wardrobe here is for thee!","(seeing the clothes) Oh, King Stephano! Worthy Stephano, look at the fabulous wardrobe waiting for you here!"
"Let it alone, thou fool. It is but trash.","Leave it alone, you fool. It’s worthless."
(puts on a gown) O King Stephano!,"Oh, monster, we know secondhand clothes when we see them.—(he puts on one of the gowns) Oh, King Stephano!"
"Put off that gown, Trinculo. By this hand, I’ll have that gown.","Take off that gown, Trinculo. I swear that gown’s for me."
Thy grace shall have it.,"You can have it then, your highness."
"To dote thus on such luggage? Let’s alone, And do the murder first. If he awake, From toe to crown he’ll fill our skins with pinches, Make us strange stuff.","To hell with this idiot! Why are you going crazy over these trashy clothes? Leave them alone, and do the murder first. If he wakes up before we kill him, he’ll never stop punishing us."
"Be you quiet, monster.—Mistress line, is not this my jerkin? Now is the jerkin under the line.—Now, jerkin, you are like to lose your hair and prove a bald jerkin.","Shut up, monster.—Madame tree, is this jacket for me? Thank you kindly. The tree’s lost its jacket. (he takes a jacket hanging on the tree)—Now the jacket might lose its fur trim and become a bald jacket. Stephano makes an elaborate (and untranslatable) pun about the shirt being like a sailor who goes to the tropics and gets a venereal disease."
"Do, do. We steal by line and level, an ’t like your grace.","Go ahead, take it. We’re stealing things the right way here."
I thank thee for that jest. Here’s a garment for ’t. Wit shall not go unrewarded while I am king of this country. “Steal by line and level” is an excellent pass of pate. There’s another garment for ’t.,"Thank you for that joke. Here, I’ll give you some clothes to show my gratitude. As king of this country I like to reward wit when I hear it. “Stealing things the right way” is a great line. Here’s another jacket to say thanks."
"Monster, come, put some lime upon your fingers, and away with the rest.","Come here, monster, put some glue on your fingers, and carry away the rest of these clothes for us."
And all be turned to barnacles or to apes With foreheads villainous low.,I won’t have any of this. We’re wasting our time. We’ll miss our chance and be turned into geese or apes with low foreheads.
"Monster, lay to your fingers. Help to bear this away where my hogshead of wine is, or I’ll turn you out of my kingdom. Go to, carry this.","Monster, use your fingers. Help us carry these clothes to where my barrel of wine is hidden, or I’ll kick you out of my kingdom. Go on, take them."
And this.,Take these too.
"Ay, and this.","Yes, and these."
"Hey, Mountain, hey!","Hey, Mountain, hey!"
"Silver. There it goes, Silver!","Silver. There they go, Silver!"
"Fury, Fury!—There, Tyrant, there. Hark, hark!","Fury, Fury!—Get over there, Tyrant, there. Listen, listen!"
"With dry convulsions, shorten up their sinews With agèd cramps, and more pinch-spotted make them Than pard or cat o' mountain.","Ariel, go order my goblin servants to make these fellows' bones ache, give them muscle cramps all over, and give them more bruises than leopards have spots."
"Hark, they roar.",Listen they’re howling.
"Let them be hunted soundly. At this hour Shortly shall all my labors end, and thou Shalt have the air at freedom. For a little Follow, and do me service.","Hunt them down. Now all my enemies are at my mercy. Soon all my work will be done, and you’ll be free. Just obey me a little bit longer."
"Now does my project gather to a head. My charms crack not, my spirits obey, and time Goes upright with his carriage. How’s the day?","My plans are almost at their climax. My spells are working well, my spirits are obeying me, and everything is right on schedule. What time is it?"
"On the sixth hour, at which time, my lord,","It’s after six o'clock, my lord, when you said our work would be finished."
"I did say so When first I raised the tempest. Say, my spirit, How fares the king and ’s followers?","That’s what I said when I first conjured the tempest. Tell me, spirit, how’s the king and his entourage?"
"Confined together In the same fashion as you gave in charge, Just as you left them, all prisoners, sir, They cannot budge till your release. The king, His brother, and yours, abide all three distracted, And the remainder mourning over them, Brimful of sorrow and dismay. But chiefly His tears run down his beard like winter’s drops From eaves of reeds. Your charm so strongly works 'em That if you now beheld them, your affections Would become tender.","All cooped up together, just as you ordered, all imprisoned in the grove of linden trees that protects your room from bad weather. They can’t move till you release them. The king, his brother, and your brother are all waiting there in a crazed state of mind, and the rest are grieving over them, sad and astonished. “Good old lord Gonzalo,” as you call him, is saddest of all, with tears running down his beard. Your magic spell has such an effect on them that if you saw them now, you’d feel sorry for them."
"Dost thou think so, spirit?","Do you think so, spirit?"
"Mine would, sir, were I human.","I’d feel sorry for them, if I were human."
"And mine shall. Hast thou, which art but air, a touch, a feeling Of their afflictions, and shall not myself, One of their kind, that relish all as sharply Passion as they, be kindlier moved than thou art? Yet with my nobler reason 'gainst my fury Do I take part. The rarer action is In virtue than in vengeance. They being penitent, The sole drift of my purpose doth extend My charms I’ll break, their senses I’ll restore, And they shall be themselves.","I will too. You’re made of air, so if even you feel sorry for them, imagine the pity that I’ll feel, being one of their own human race. I suffer pain just as much as they do, so I’ll sympathize far more than you. Though I’m indignant about their evil deeds, I’ll go with my nobler instincts, which tell me to feel some compassion for them. It’s better to act virtuously rather than vengefully. Now that they’re sorry, I don’t want anything more. Go release them, Ariel. I’ll break my spells and bring them back to their senses, and they’ll feel like themselves again."
"I’ll fetch them, sir.","I’ll go get them, sir."
"(tracing a circle on the ground) Ye elves of hills, brooks, standing lakes, and groves, Do chase the ebbing Neptune and do fly him When he comes back; you demi-puppets that By moonshine do the green sour ringlets make, Whereof the ewe not bites; and you whose pastime To hear the solemn curfew; by whose aid, Weak masters though ye be, I have bedimmed The noontide sun, called forth the mutinous winds, And ’twixt the green sea and the azured vault Have I given fire, and rifted Jove’s stout oak","(drawing a large circle on the stage with his staff) I’ve darkened the noontime sun with the aid of you elves who live in the hills and brooks and groves, and you who chase the sea on the beach without leaving footprints in the sand, and run away when the waves come back; and you who make toadstools while the moon shines; who make mushrooms as a hobby after the evening bell has rung. With your help I’ve called up the angry winds, and set the green sea and blue sky at war with each other. I’ve given lightning to the thunderclouds, and burned up Jupiter’s beloved oak."
"With his own bolt; the strong-based promontory Have I made shake, and by the spurs plucked up The pine and cedar; graves at my command By my so potent art. But this rough magic I here abjure, and when I have required Some heavenly music, which even now I do, To work mine end upon their senses that Bury it certain fathoms in the earth, And deeper than did ever plummet sound I’ll drown my book.","With his own lightning bolts; I’ve shaken up the sturdy cliffs and uprooted pines and cedars; I’ve opened up graves and awakened the corpses sleeping in them, letting them out with my powerful magic. But I surrender all this magic now, when I’ve summoned some heavenly music to cast a spell, as I’m doing now, I’ll break my staff and bury it far underground, and throw my book of magic spells deeper into the sea than any anchor ever sank."
"A solemn air and the best comforter Now useless, boiled within thy skull.—There stand, For you are spell-stopped.— (to GONZALO) Holy Gonzalo, honorable man, Mine eyes, ev'n sociable to the show of thine, (aside)    The charm dissolves apace, And as the morning steals upon the night, Melting the darkness, so their rising senses Begin to chase the ignorant fumes that mantle Their clearer reason.— My true preserver and a loyal sir","Let this solemn melody comfort your fevered minds, which are now useless, seething inside your skulls.—All of you stand there in my spell.—(to GONZALO) Good Gonzalo, you honorable man, my eyes weep for you, since I feel what you must feel now. (to himself) The spell is breaking gradually, and just as dawn creeps in and melts away the darkness, they will slowly return to their senses.—(to GONZALO) Oh, my dear Gonzalo, you’re my savior and loyal to your lord, I’ll reward you fully, not just with praise but with actions too.—"
"To him you follow’st, I will pay thy graces Home both in word and deed.— (to ALONSO)     Most cruelly Thy brother was a furtherer in the act.— (to SEBASTIAN) Thou art pinched for ’t now, Sebastian.— (to ANTONIO)Flesh and blood, You brother mine, that entertained ambition, Whose inward pinches therefore are most strong, Would here have killed your king—I do forgive thee, Unnatural though thou art. (aside)     Their understanding Begins to swell, and the approaching tide That now lies foul and muddy. Not one of them That yet looks on me, or would know me.— (to ARIEL)      Ariel, Fetch me the hat and rapier in my cell. As I was sometime Milan. Quickly, spirit. Thou shalt ere long be free.","(to ALONSO) You, Alonso, manipulated me and my daughter cruelly, and your brother helped you.—(to SEBASTIAN) You’re paying the price for it now, Sebastian.—(to ANTONIO) My brother, you were so greedy for power that you forgot natural compassion and our bond as brothers, and were ready to kill your king—I forgive you, though you’re a monster.—(to himself) Look at them, they’re starting to understand. Soon their confused minds will clear up. But at this point not a single one of them recognizes me.—(to ARIEL) Ariel, get me my hat and sword from my room. I’ll take off the clothes I’m wearing now, and put on the ones I used to wear in Milan.—Soon, spirit, you’ll be free."
"(sings and helps to attire PROSPERO) Where the bee sucks, there suck I. In a cowslip’s bell I lie. There I couch when owls do cry. On the bat’s back I do fly After summer merrily. Merrily, merrily shall I live now Under the blossom that hangs on the bough."," (he sings and helps PROSPERO dress) Where the bee drinks, I drink dew. I lie in the cup of a cowslip flower. I sleep there when the owls hoot. I fly on a bat’s back, following the summer around the globe. Happily, happily I will live now Under the blossom that hangs on the bough."
"Why, that’s my dainty Ariel. I shall miss thee, To the king’s ship, invisible as thou art. There shalt thou find the mariners asleep","Why, that’s my dainty Ariel singing now. I’ll miss you, Ariel, but you’ll be free.—Yes, you will, yes.—Go to the king’s ship in your invisible state. There you’ll find the sailors asleep below deck. Find the Master and"
"Under the hatches. The Master and the Boatswain Being awake, enforce them to this place,","Boatswain, who will be awake, and bring them here right away, please."
"I drink the air before me, and return Or ere your pulse twice beat.","I’ll go so fast I’ll burn up the air, and come back in two heartbeats."
"All torment, trouble, wonder, and amazement Inhabits here. Some heavenly power guide us","This place is full of trouble, torments, and amazements. Please come, heavenly powers, and guide us out of this godforsaken country!"
"(to ALONSO)     Behold, sir King, The wrongèd Duke of Milan, Prospero. For more assurance that a living prince Does now speak to thee, I embrace thy body. A hearty welcome. (embraces ALONSO)","(to ALONSO) Your Highness, you see before you the Duke of Milan, Prospero, who’s been wronged. I’ll embrace you now so you will know it’s really me, a living prince, talking to you. I heartily welcome you and your entourage here. (he embraces ALONSO)"
"Whe'er thou beest he or no, Or some enchanted trifle to abuse me, As late I have been, I not know. Thy pulse Beats as of flesh and blood. And since I saw thee, I fear a madness held me. This must crave— An if this be at all—a most strange story. Thy dukedom I resign and do entreat Thou pardon me my wrongs. But how should Prospero","Whether you’re really him or whether this is some magic trick like I was recently subjected to, I don’t know. Your heart beats like you were real, and ever since I saw you, I feel my mind becoming sane again, released from its earlier insanity. There must be a strange explanation for this—if it’s true. I surrender your dukedom and beg you to forgive me all my crimes. But how is it possible that Prospero’s alive and well and living on this island?"
"(to GONZALO)    First, noble friend, Let me embrace thine age, whose honor cannot Be measured or confined.","(to GONZALO) First, my noble old friend, let me embrace you, who are more honorable than I can say."
"Whether this be Or be not, I’ll not swear.",I won’t bet on whether or not any of this is real.
"You do yet taste Believe things certain. Welcome, my friends all. (aside to SEBASTIAN and ANTONIO) But you, my brace of lords, were I so minded, I here could pluck his highness' frown upon you I will tell no tales.","You’re still experiencing some of the little quirks of this island, which makes so many things seem uncertain. Welcome, my friends. (speaking so that only SEBASTIAN and ANTONIO can hear) But you two lords, if I felt like it, I could turn you in as the traitors you are. But as for now, I won’t say a word."
The devil speaks in him.,It’s the devil speaking through him.
"No.—(to ANTONIO) For you, most wicked sir, whom to call brother Would even infect my mouth, I do forgive Thy rankest fault, all of them, and require Thou must restore.","No.—(to ANTONIO) As for you, you evil man that I can’t even call brother, I forgive you for even your worst sin, all your sins. I demand my dukedom back from you, which I know you have to give me."
"If thou beest Prospero, Give us particulars of thy preservation, How thou hast met us here, whom three hours since Were wracked upon this shore, where I have lost— My dear son Ferdinand.","If you’re Prospero, give us the details of how you were saved, how you met us here, when we were just shipwrecked here three hours ago, when I lost—How painful the memory is!—my dear son Ferdinand"
"I am woe for ’t, sir.","I’m sorry about that, sir."
"Irreparable is the loss, and patience Says it is past her cure.","No one can undo this loss of mine, and trying to endure it patiently doesn’t help."
"I rather think You have not sought her help, of whose soft grace And rest myself content.","I don’t think you’ve tried to endure it. Being patient has helped me a lot, for I have suffered a loss similar to yours."
You the like loss?,You suffered a loss like mine?
"As great to me as late. And supportable To make the dear loss have I means much weaker Than you may call to comfort you, for I","Yes, just as great and just as recent. And I have much less to comfort me than you do, since I’ve lost my daughter."
"A daughter? O heavens, that they were living both in Naples, The king and queen there! That they were, I wish Myself were mudded in that oozy bed Where my son lies.—When did you lose your daughter?","A daughter? Oh God, I wish the two of them were alive and living in Naples, as king and queen! I’d give up my life and take my son’s place in the mud on the ocean floor if I could see them alive in Naples.—When did you lose your daughter?"
"At this encounter do so much admire That they devour their reason and scarce think Their eyes do offices of truth, their words Are natural breath.—But howsoev'r you have That I am Prospero and that very duke Which was thrust forth of Milan, who most strangely Upon this shore where you were wracked, was landed, To be the lord on ’t.","In this recent storm. These lords seem so astonished that they’ve lost their use of reason and can hardly believe what they see with their own eyes.—But whatever the reason for your losing your senses, you can know for sure that I’m Prospero, that same duke who was kicked out of Milan and landed on this same island where you landed, and became the lord of it. No more of this story now, for it takes days to tell, not just a chat over breakfast or during this first meeting of ours."
"No more yet of this, Not a relation for a breakfast, nor Befitting this first meeting. (to ALONSO)  Welcome, sir. This cell’s my court. Here have I few attendants My dukedom since you have given me again, I will requite you with as good a thing, At least bring forth a wonder to content ye As much as me my dukedom.","(to ALONSO) Welcome, sir. This room’s my royal court. I have hardly any servants and no subjects outside this room. Please, have a look. Since you’ve given my dukedom back to me, I’ll give you something equally nice, or at least I’ll give you an amazement to satisfy you as much as my dukedom satisfies me."
"(to FERDINAND) Sweet lord, you play me false.","(to FERDINAND) My sweet lord, you’re cheating."
"No, my dearest love, I would not for the world.","No, my dearest love, I wouldn’t cheat you for the whole world."
"Yes, for a score of kingdoms you should wrangle, And I would call it fair play.","Maybe not the whole world, but you’d cheat for twenty kingdoms. But even then I’d still lie and say you were playing by the rules."
If this prove Shall I twice lose.,"If this dream vision is typical of what this island conjures up, then I’ll lose my son twice."
A most high miracle!,A wonderful miracle!
"(seeing ALONSO and kneeling) Though the seas threaten, they are merciful. I have cursed them without cause.","(seeing ALONSO and kneeling) The seas may threaten us, but they show mercy sometimes too. I cursed them for no reason."
"Now all the blessings Arise, and say how thou camest here.",Receive all the blessings of a happy father. Get up and tell me how you came here.
"Oh, wonder! How many goodly creatures are there here! How beauteous mankind is! O brave new world, That has such people in ’t!","How amazing! How many wonderful creatures there are here! Mankind is so beautiful! Oh, what a wonderful new world, that has such people in it!"
'Tis new to thee.,It’s new to you.
What is this maid with whom thou wast at play? Your eld’st acquaintance cannot be three hours. Is she the goddess that hath severed us And brought us thus together?,(to FERDINAND) Who is this girl you were playing chess with? You can’t have known her for more than three hours. Is she the goddess that separated us and then brought us back together?
"Sir, she is mortal. I chose her when I could not ask my father For his advice, nor thought I had one. She Is daughter to this famous Duke of Milan, Of whom so often I have heard renown Received a second life. And second father This lady makes him to me.","No, sir, she’s human. But by the grace of God, she’s mine. I chose her for my wife when I thought I had no father to ask advice of. She’s the daughter of this famous Duke of Milan I heard so much about but never saw before. He’s given me a second life, and marrying her makes him a second father to me."
"I am hers. But oh, how oddly will it sound that I Must ask my child forgiveness!","And I’m her father as well. But oh, how odd it is to have to ask for my child’s forgiveness!"
"There, sir, stop. A heaviness that’s gone.","Stop right there, sir. Let’s not get gloomy in our reminiscing, since there’s no reason for sadness anymore."
"I have inly wept, Or should have spoke ere this. Look down, you gods, And on this couple drop a blessèd crown, For it is you that have chalked forth the way","I’ve been crying to myself just now, or I would’ve said the same thing. Dear gods, bless this couple, since you’re the ones who have shown us the path that led us here."
"I say amen, Gonzalo.","Amen to that, Gonzalo."
"Was Milan thrust from Milan, that his issue Should become kings of Naples? O, rejoice Beyond a common joy, and set it down With gold on lasting pillars. In one voyage And Ferdinand, her brother, found a wife Where he himself was lost; Prospero, his dukedom In a poor isle; and all of us, ourselves When no man was his own.","Was the Duke of Milan kicked out of Milan so his children could become kings of Naples? Oh, this is cause for an extraordinary joy that should be engraved in gold on pillars to last forever. On one and the same trip Claribel found a husband in Tunis, and Ferdinand, her brother, found a wife where he was shipwrecked; Prospero found his dukedom on a poor island; and all of us found ourselves when we lost control of ourselves."
Let grief and sorrow still embrace his heart That doth not wish you joy.,(to FERDINAND and MIRANDA) Give me your hands. May anyone who doesn’t wish you joy feel grief and sorrow.
Be it so. Amen.,So be it. Amen.
"Oh, look, sir, look, sir! Here is more of us. I prophesied if a gallows were on land, (to BOATSWAIN)  Now, blasphemy, That swear’st grace o'erboard, not an oath on shore? Hast thou no mouth by land? What is the news?","Oh, look, sir, look, sir! More of us are here. I remember I predicted that this guy could never drown, as long as there are gallows around on the land. (to BOATSWAIN) Hey, you curser, who defiled our ship with your foul language, don’t you have any gutter talk for us on shore? What’s going on?"
"The best news is that we have safely found Which, but three glasses since, we gave out split— Is tight and yare and bravely rigged as when We first put out to sea.",The best news of all is that we’ve located our king and our men. The next bit of good news is that our ship—which we gave up for ruined only three hours ago—is as well-outfitted and seaworthy as it was when we first set sail.
"(aside to PROSPERO) Sir, all this service","(speaking so that only PROSPERO can hear) Sir, I’ve done all this work for you since I left you last."
(aside to ARIEL) My tricksy spirit!,(speaking so that only ARIEL can hear) My clever spirit!
"These are not natural events. They strengthen From strange to stranger.— (to BOATSWAIN) Say, how came you hither?","These are unnatural events. They get stranger all the time.—(to BOATSWAIN) Tell me, how did you get here?"
"I’d strive to tell you. We were dead of sleep And—how, we know not—all clapped under hatches, Where but even now with strange and several noises Of roaring, shrieking, howling, jingling chains, We were awaked, straightway at liberty, Where we, in all her trim, freshly beheld Our royal, good, and gallant ship, our Master Capering to eye her. On a trice, so please you, And were brought moping hither.","If I were sure I was wide awake, I’d try to tell you. We were fast asleep and somehow—we don’t know how—we were stowed below deck, where we heard lots of roaring, shrieking, howling, and jingling chains. The sounds were so horrible that we woke up liberated, and saw our wonderful ship safe and sound. The master was dancing with joy to see it. In an instant we were separated from them, as if in a dream, and brought here in a daze."
(aside to PROSPERO)  Was ’t well done?,(speaking so that only PROSPERO can hear) Did I do it right?
"(aside to ARIEL) Bravely, my diligence. Thou shalt be free.","(speaking so that only ARIEL can hear) You did it perfectly, my little worker. You’ll get your freedom."
"This is as strange a maze as e'er men trod, Was ever conduct of. Some oracle Must rectify our knowledge.","This is a stranger business than men have ever set foot in before, and it’s not natural either. We need some oracle to tell us what’s going on."
"Sir, my liege, Do not infest your mind with beating on The strangeness of this business. At picked leisure Which to you shall seem probable—of every These happened accidents. Till when, be cheerful And think of each thing well. (aside to ARIEL)  Come hither, spirit. Untie the spell.","Sir, my king, don’t waste your time mulling over how strange this business is. When the time is right, and it’ll be soon, I promise I alone will explain everything that’s happened. Until then, be cheerful and keep an open mind. (speaking so that only ARIEL can hear) Come here, spirit; set Caliban and his fellow slaves free. Break the spell that enslaves them to me."
How fares my gracious sir? There are yet missing of your company Some few odd lads that you remember not.,"How is my lord? There are a few men still missing from the ship, a few odd guys you’ve forgotten about."
"Every man shift for all the rest and let no man take care for himself, for all is but fortune. Coraggio, bully-monster, coraggio!","Look out for the other guy, and don’t put yourself first, since everything happens randomly. Courage! Courage, you fine old monster."
"If these be true spies which I wear in my head, here’s a goodly sight.","If I can believe my eyes, this is a fine sight to see."
"O Setebos, these be brave spirits indeed! He will chastise me.","Oh Setebos, these are handsome spirits! How wonderful my master is! I’m afraid he’ll punish me."
"Ha, ha! What things are these, my lord Antonio? Will money buy 'em?","Ha, ha! What are these things we’re looking at, my lord Antonio? Can you buy them with money?"
"Very like. One of them Is a plain fish, and no doubt marketable.",Definitely. The one that looks like a fish is very marketable.
"Then say if they be true. (indicates CALIBAN) This misshapen knave, His mother was a witch, and one so strong That could control the moon, make flows and ebbs, These three have robbed me, and this demi-devil— For he’s a bastard one—had plotted with them To take my life. Two of these fellows you Must know and own. This thing of darkness I","Take a look at their servants' name tags, my lords, then tell me what they are. (he points at CALIBAN) This misshapen monster, his mother was a witch so powerful she could control the moon and the tides. These three have robbed me, and this bastard half-devil plotted with them to kill me. Two of these men you must recognize and claim as your own. This evil monster I acknowledge is mine."
I shall be pinched to death.,He’ll kill me with tortures.
"Is not this Stephano, my drunken butler?","Isn’t this Stephano, my drunken butler?"
He is drunk now. Where had he wine?,He’s definitely drunk now. Where did he get wine?
And Trinculo is reeling ripe. Where should they How camest thou in this pickle?,And Trinculo’s drunk. Where did they find the liquor to get drunk on?—(to TRINCULO) How did you get this way?
"I have been in such a pickle since I saw you last that, I fear me, will never out of my bones. I shall not fear flyblowing.","I’ve been so wasted since I saw you last that I’m worried I’ll never be sober again. But at least I won’t rot, being so full of alcohol."
"Why, how now, Stephano?","How are you doing, Stephano?"
"O, touch me not. I am not Stephano, but a cramp.","Oh, don’t touch me. I’m not Stephano, I’m a walking cramp."
"You’d be king o' th' isle, sirrah?","You wanted to be king of the island, sir?"
I should have been a sore one then.,I would’ve been a sore king then.
(indicating CALIBAN) This is a strange thing as e'er I looked on.,(pointing at CALIBAN) This is the strangest thing I ever saw in my life.
"As in his shape.—(to CALIBAN) Go, sirrah, to my cell. Take with you your companions. As you look To have my pardon, trim it handsomely.","He’s as ugly in his manners as he is in appearance.—(to CALIBAN) Go, sir, to my room, and take your companions with you. If you want me to forgive you, make it neat and tidy."
"Ay, that I will. And I’ll be wise hereafter Was I, to take this drunkard for a god And worship this dull fool!",I will indeed. And after this I’ll be good and hope you forgive me. What an idiot I was to think this drunkard was a god and to worship such a stupid fool!
"Go to, away.","Go away, now."
"(to STEPHANO and TRINCULO) Hence, and bestow your luggage where you found it.","(to STEPHANO and TRINCULO) Go, and put your garbage back where you found it."
"Or stole it, rather.","Or stole it, rather."
"Sir, I invite your highness and your train To my poor cell, where you shall take your rest For this one night, which—part of it—I’ll waste With such discourse as, I not doubt, shall make it And the particular accidents gone by Since I came to this isle. And in the morn I’ll bring you to your ship and so to Naples, Where I have hope to see the nuptial And thence retire me to my Milan, where Every third thought shall be my grave.","Sir, I invite your highness and your entourage to my little room, where you can sleep tonight. But for this evening—part of it, at least—I’ll tell you tales to make the time pass quickly. I’ll narrate the story of my life, and give you all the details of what happened to me since I first came to this island. And in the morning I’ll take you to your ship and we’ll sail to Naples, where I hope to see this loving couple married. After that I’ll retire to Milan, where I’ll contemplate my death, which is soon to come."
"I long To hear the story of your life, which must Take the ear strangely.","I’m dying to hear your life story, which must be a strange tale."
"I’ll deliver all, And sail so expeditious that shall catch Your royal fleet far off.—(aside to ARIEL) My Ariel, chick, That is thy charge. Then to the elements Be free, and fare thou well!—Please you, draw near.","I’ll tell you everything, and I promise to give you calm seas and favorable winds for your trip. You’ll sail so fast that you’ll catch up with the royal navy.—(speaking so that only ARIEL can hear) My Ariel, baby, that job’s for you. After that you’ll be free as the air. Farewell!—Please, all the rest of you, come closer."
"Now my charms are all o'erthrown, And what strength I have’s mine own, Which is most faint. Now, ’tis true, I must be here confined by you, Since I have my dukedom got And pardoned the deceiver, dwell In this bare island by your spell, But release me from my bands Gentle breath of yours my sails Must fill, or else my project fails, Which was to please. Now I want Spirits to enforce, art to enchant, Unless I be relieved by prayer, Which pierces so that it assaults Mercy itself and frees all faults. As you from crimes would pardoned be,","Now my spells are all broken, And the only power I have is my own, Which is very weak. Now you all Have got the power to keep me prisoner here, Or send me off to Naples. Please don’t Keep me here on this desert island With your magic spells. Release me So I can return to my dukedom With your help. The gentle wind You blow with your applause Will fill my ship’s sails. Without applause, My plan to please you has failed. Now I have no spirits to enslave, No magic to cast spells, And I’ll end up in despair Unless I’m relieved by prayer, Which wins over God himself And absolves all sins. Just as you’d like to have your sins forgiven, Indulge me, forgive me, and set me free."
