"If music be the food of love, play on. Give me excess of it that, surfeiting, The appetite may sicken, and so die. That strain again, it had a dying fall. That breathes upon a bank of violets, Stealing and giving odor. Enough, no more. 'Tis not so sweet now as it was before. O spirit of love, how quick and fresh art thou, Receiveth as the sea, nought enters there, Of what validity and pitch soe'er, But falls into abatement and low price Even in a minute. So full of shapes is fancy","If it’s true that music makes people more in love, keep playing. Give me too much of it, so I’ll get sick of it and stop loving. Play that part again! It sounded sad. Oh, it sounded like a sweet breeze blowing gently over a bank of violets, taking their scent with it. That’s enough. Stop. It doesn’t sound as sweet as it did before. Oh, love is so restless! It makes you want everything, but it makes you sick of things a minute later, no matter how good they are. Love is so vivid and fantastical that nothing compares to it."
"Will you go hunt, my lord?","Do you want to go hunting, my lord?"
"What, Curio?","Hunting what, Curio?"
The hart.,The hart hart = male deer hart .
"Why, so I do, the noblest that I have. Oh, when mine eyes did see Olivia first, Methought she purged the air of pestilence. And my desires, like fell and cruel hounds, E'er since pursue me.","That’s what I’m doing—only it’s my heart that’s being hunted. Oh, when I first saw Olivia, it seemed like she made the air around her sweeter and purer. In that instant I was transformed into a hart, and my desire for her has hounded me like a pack of vicious dogs."
How now! What news from her?,What’s going on? What have you heard from her?
"So please my lord, I might not be admitted, But from her handmaid do return this answer: Shall not behold her face at ample view, But like a cloistress, she will veiled walk And water once a day her chamber round With eye-offending brine—all this to season And lasting in her sad remembrance.","I’m sorry, but they wouldn’t let me in. But I got the following answer from her handmaid. Olivia’s not going to show her face for the next seven years—not even to the sky itself. Instead, she’ll go around veiled like a nun, and once a day she’ll water her room with tears. She’s doing this out of love for her dead brother, whom she wants to keep fresh in her memory forever."
"O, she that hath a heart of that fine frame To pay this debt of love but to a brother, How will she love, when the rich golden shaft That live in her, when liver, brain, and heart, These sovereign thrones, are all supplied, and filled Her sweet perfections with one self king! Away before me to sweet beds of flowers.","Oh, if she loves her brother this much, think how she’ll love me when I finally win her over and make her forget all her other attachments! Her mind and heart will be ruled by one man alone—me! Take me to the garden. I need a beautiful place to sit and think about love."
"What country, friends, is this?","What country is this, friends?"
"This is Illyria, lady.","This is Illyria, lady."
"And what should I do in Illyria? My brother he is in Elysium. Perchance he is not drown’d.—What think you, sailors?","And what am I supposed to do in Illyria? My brother is in heaven. Or maybe there’s a chance he didn’t drown.—What do you think, sailors?"
It is perchance that you yourself were saved.,It was a total fluke that you yourself were saved.
"O, my poor brother! And so perchance may he be.","Oh, my poor brother! But maybe by some fluke he was saved too."
"True, madam. And, to comfort you with chance, Assure yourself, after our ship did split, When you and those poor number saved with you Most provident in peril, bind himself, Courage and hope both teaching him the practice, To a strong mast that lived upon the sea, Where, like Arion on the dolphin’s back, So long as I could see.","It’s possible, ma'am. Don’t give up yet. When our ship was wrecked and you and a few other survivors were clinging onto our lifeboat, I saw your brother tie himself to a big mast floating in the sea. He was acting resourcefully and courageously in a dangerous situation. For as long as I could see him, he stayed afloat on the waves like Arion Arion was a Greek poet who was saved from drowning by a dolphin. Arion on the dolphin’s back."
"(giving him money) For saying so, there’s gold. Mine own escape unfoldeth to my hope, Whereto thy speech serves for authority,","(giving him money) Thank you for saying that—here’s some money to express my gratitude. Since I survived, it’s easier for me to imagine he survived too, and what you say gives me a reason to hope for the best. Do you know this area we’re in?"
"Ay, madam, well, for I was bred and born Not three hours' travel from this very place.","Yes, ma'am, I know it well. I was born and raised less than three hours from here."
Who governs here?,Who’s the ruler here?
"A noble duke, in nature As in name.",A duke who is noble in name and character.
What is his name?,What’s his name?
Orsino.,Orsino.
He was a bachelor then.,"Orsino. I’ve heard my father mention him. When I first heard about him, he was still a bachelor."
"And so is now, or was so very late. For but a month ago I went from hence, And then ’twas fresh in murmur—as, you know, That he did seek the love of fair Olivia.","He’s still a bachelor, or at least he was a month ago, when I left. But there was a rumor—you know, people always gossip about royalty—that he was in love with the beautiful Olivia."
What’s she?,Who’s she?
"A virtuous maid, the daughter of a count That died some twelvemonth since, then leaving her Who shortly also died, for whose dear love, They say, she hath abjured the company And sight of men.","A virtuous young woman, the daughter of a count who died last year. Her brother had custody of her for a while, but then he died too. They say she’s totally sworn off men now, in memory of her brother."
"Oh, that I served that lady And might not be delivered to the world, What my estate is.",I wish I could work for that lady! It’d be a good way to hide from the world until the time was right to identify myself.
"That were hard to compass, Because she will admit no kind of suit, No, not the duke’s.","That would be hard to do. She won’t allow anyone in to see her, not even the duke’s messengers."
"There is a fair behavior in thee, captain, Doth oft close in pollution, yet of thee I will believe thou hast a mind that suits With this thy fair and outward character. I prithee—and I’ll pay thee bounteously— For such disguise as haply shall become The form of my intent. I’ll serve this duke. Thou shall present me as an eunuch to him. It may be worth thy pains, for I can sing That will allow me very worth his service. What else may hap to time I will commit. Only shape thou thy silence to my wit.","You seem to be a good person, captain, and although people who look beautiful are often corrupt inside, I believe that you have a beautiful mind to go with your good looks and manners. Please—and I’ll pay you plenty for this—help me conceal my identity, and find me the right disguise so I can look the way I want. I want to be this Duke’s servant. You’ll introduce me to him as a eunuch. You won’t be wasting your time, because I really can sing and talk to him about many different kinds of music, so he’ll be happy to have me in his service. Only time will tell what will happen after that—just please keep quiet about what I’m trying to do."
"Be you his eunuch, and your mute I’ll be.","I won’t say a word. You can be a eunuch, but I’ll be mute. I swear on my life I won’t tell your secret."
I thank thee. Lead me on.,Thank you. Show me the way.
"What a plague means my niece, to take the death of her brother thus? I am sure care’s an enemy to life.",What’s wrong with my niece? Why is she reacting so strangely to her brother’s death? Grief is bad for people’s health.
"By my troth, Sir Toby, you must come in earlier o' nights. Your cousin, my lady, takes great exceptions to your ill hours.","For God’s sake, Sir Toby, you’ve got to come home earlier at night. My lady Olivia, your niece, disapproves of your late-night partying."
"Why, let her except, before excepted.","Well, she can get used to it."
"Ay, but you must confine yourself within the modest limits of order.","Yes, but you need to keep yourself within the limits of order and decency."
"Confine? I’ll confine myself no finer than I am. These clothes are good enough to drink in, and so be these boots too. An they be not, let them hang themselves in their own straps.","Keep myself? The only thing I’m keeping myself in is the clothes I’m wearing. They’re good enough to drink in, and so are these boots. If they aren’t, they can go hang themselves by their own laces!"
"That quaffing and drinking will undo you: I heard my lady talk of it yesterday, and of a foolish knight that you brought in one night here to be her wooer.",You’re going to destroy yourself with all this drinking. Lady Olivia said so yesterday. She also mentioned some stupid knight you brought in one night as a possible husband for her.
"Who, Sir Andrew Aguecheek?","Who, Sir Andrew Aguecheek?"
"Ay, he.","Yes, that’s the one."
He’s as tall a man as any ’s in Illyria.,He’s as tall “Tall” could be used as slang for “brave.” tall as a man in Illyria.
What’s that to the purpose?,What does his height have to do with anything?
"Why, he has three thousand ducats a year.","Why, he has an income of three thousand ducats a year."
"Ay, but he’ll have but a year in all these ducats. He’s a very fool and a prodigal.",I bet he’ll spend his whole inheritance in a year. He’s a fool and a spendthrift.
"Fie, that you’ll say so! He plays o' the viol-de-gamboys, and speaks three or four languages word for word without book, and hath all the good gifts of nature.",You shouldn’t talk about him like that! He plays the violin and speaks three or four languages word for word without a dictionary. He has all of nature’s best gifts.
"He hath indeed, almost natural, for besides that he’s a fool, he’s a great quarreler, and but that he hath the gift of a coward to allay the gust he hath in quarreling, ’tis thought among the prudent he would quickly have the gift of a grave.","Right—he’s a natural-born idiot. Besides being a fool, he’s argumentative. If he didn’t have the coward’s gift for backing down from a fight, they say he’d be dead by now."
"By this hand, they are scoundrels and substractors that say so of him. Who are they?",Anyone who says that is a lying piece of garbage. Who said that?
"They that add, moreover, he’s drunk nightly in your company.",The same people who say he gets drunk with you every night.
"With drinking healths to my niece. I’ll drink to her as long as there is a passage in my throat and drink in Illyria. He’s a coward and a coistrel that will not drink to my niece till his brains turn o' th' toe like a parish top. What, wench! 								Castiliano vulgo, for here comes Sir Andrew Agueface.","We only drink toasts to my niece. I’ll drink to her as long as there’s a hole in my throat and booze in Illyria. Anyone who refuses to drink to my niece until his brain spins around like a merry-go-round is scum. But speak of the devil, here comes Sir Andrew Agueface."
"Sir Toby Belch! How now, Sir Toby Belch!","Sir Toby Belch! How are you, Sir Toby Belch?"
Sweet Sir Andrew!,Sweet Sir Andrew!
"(to MARIA) Bless you, fair shrew.","(to MARIA) And hello to you, my little wench."
"And you too, sir.","Hello, sir."
"Accost, Sir Andrew, accost.","Chat her up, Sir Andrew. Chat her up."
What’s that?,What?
My niece’s chambermaid.,This is my niece’s maid.
"Good Mistress Accost, I desire better acquaintance.","My dear Miss Chat-her-up, I look forward to getting to know you better."
"My name is Mary, sir.","My name is Mary, sir."
Good Mistress Mary Accost—,Miss Mary Chat-her-up—
"You mistake, knight. “Accost” is front her, board her, woo her, assail her.","No, you’ve got it wrong. When I said “chat her up,” I wasn’t saying her name. I was telling you to go after her, woo her, confront her."
"By my troth, I would not undertake her in this company. Is that the meaning of “accost”?","Good heavens, I’d never do that with people watching. Is that really what you meant?"
"Fare you well, gentlemen. (she starts to exit)","Goodbye, gentlemen. (she starts to exit)"
"An thou let part so, Sir Andrew, would thou mightst never draw sword again.","She’s leaving. If you let her go this easily, Sir Andrew, you don’t deserve to ever use your sword again."
"An you part so, mistress, I would I might never draw sword again. Fair lady, do you think you have fools in hand?","If you leave like this, my dear, I won’t ever use my sword again. I’m not just talking nonsense to you, I mean everything I say. Do you think you’ve got a couple of fools on your hands here?"
"Sir, I have not you by the hand.","I’m not holding your hand, sir."
"Marry, but you shall have, and here’s my hand.",But you will. Here’s my hand. (he offers her his hand)
"(taking his hand) Now, sir, thought is free. I pray you, bring your hand to the buttery-bar and let it drink.",(taking his hand) A girl’s got a right to her opinions. Take your hand to a bar and put a drink in it.
"Wherefore, sweetheart? What’s your metaphor?","Why, sweetheart? Is there a hidden meaning in this?"
"It’s dry, sir.","You’re not holding a glass. Your hand is dry Maria implies that he’s old and dried-up. dry , sir."
"Why, I think so. I am not such an ass, but I can keep my hand dry. But what’s your jest?","Well, I hope so. I’m not such an idiot that I can’t keep my hands dry. But I don’t get it—what’s the joke?"
"A dry jest, sir.","Just a bit of my dry humor, sir."
Are you full of them?,Are you always so funny?
"Ay, sir, I have them at my fingers' ends. Marry, now I let go your hand, I am barren.","Yes, I’ve got a handful of jokes. But oops, when I let go of your hand, I let go of the biggest joke of all."
"O knight, thou lackest a cup of canary. When did I see thee so put down?","Sir, you need a drink. When has anyone ever put you down like that."
"Never in your life, I think, unless you see canary put me down. Methinks sometimes I have no more wit than a Christian or an ordinary man has. But I am a great eater of beef, and I believe that does harm to my wit.","Never. I’ve only been that far down when I’ve drunk myself under the table. Sometimes I think I’m no smarter than average. I eat a lot of red meat, and maybe that makes me stupid."
No question.,Absolutely.
"An I thought that, I’d forswear it. I’ll ride home tomorrow, Sir Toby.","If I really believed that, I’d give up red meat totally. By the way, I’m going home tomorrow, Sir Toby."
"Pourquoi, my dear knight?","Pourquoi Pourquoi means “why” in French. Pourquoi , my friend?"
"What is “pourquoi”? Do, or not do? I would I had bestowed that time in the tongues that I have in fencing, dancing, and bear-baiting. O, had I but followed the arts!","What does “pourquoi” mean? Does it mean I will or I won’t? Oh, I wish I’d spent as much time learning languages as I spent on fencing, dancing, and bear-baiting Bear-baiting, in which a bear was tied to a stake and attacked by dogs, was a popular entertainment in Shakespeare’s time. bear-baiting ! If only I’d taken school more seriously!"
Then hadst thou had an excellent head of hair.,You’d have a great hairstyle if you had.
"Why, would that have mended my hair?","Why, would that have fixed my hair?"
"Past question, for thou seest it will not curl by nature.","Oh, no question—it won’t style itself."
"But it becomes me well enough, does ’t not?","But my hair looks good anyway, doesn’t it?"
Excellent. It hangs like flax on a distaff. And I hope to see a housewife take thee between her legs and spin it off.,It looks great. It hangs like an old worn-out mop. Some woman should give you syphilis so you go bald.
"Faith, I’ll home tomorrow, Sir Toby. Your niece will not be seen. Or if she be, it’s four to one she’ll none of me. The count himself here hard by woos her.","Listen, I’m going home tomorrow, Sir Toby. Your niece is refusing to see anyone, and even if she saw me, ten to one she’d want nothing to do with me. That duke who lives nearby is courting her."
"She’ll none o' the count. She’ll not match above her degree, neither in estate, years, nor wit. I have heard her swear ’t. Tut, there’s life in ’t, man.","She’s not interested in the duke. She doesn’t want to marry anyone of higher social rank than her, or anyone richer, older, or smarter. I’ve heard her say that. So cheer up, there’s still hope for you, man."
I’ll stay a month longer. I am a fellow o' th' strangest mind i' th' world. I delight in masques and revels sometimes altogether.,"All right, I’ll stay another month. Ah, I’m an odd kind of guy. Sometimes all I want to do is see plays and go out dancing."
"Art thou good at these kickshawses, knight?",Are you good at those kinds of things?
"As any man in Illyria, whatsoever he be, under the degree of my betters. And yet I will not compare with an old man.","Yes, as good as any man in Illyria, except for the ones who are better at it than I am. I’m not as good as someone who’s been dancing for years."
"What is thy excellence in a galliard, knight?",How good are you at those fast dances?
"Faith, I can cut a caper.","Believe me, I can cut a caper cut a caper = dance cut a caper ."
And I can cut the mutton to ’t.,And I can cut some meat to go with your capers caper = a condiment capers .
And I think I have the back-trick simply as strong as any man in Illyria.,And I can do that fancy backward step as well as any man in Illyria.
"Wherefore are these things hid? Wherefore have these gifts a curtain before 'em? Are they like to take dust, like Mistress Mall’s picture? Why dost thou not go to church in a galliard and come home in a coranto? My very walk should be a jig. I would not so much as make water but in a sink-a-pace. What dost thou mean? Is it a world to hide virtues in? I did think, by the excellent constitution of thy leg, it was formed under the star of a galliard.","Why do you hide these things? Why do you keep these talents behind a curtain? Are they likely to get dusty? Why don’t you go off to church dancing one way, and come home dancing another way? If I had your talents, I’d be dancing a jig every time I walked down the street. I wouldn’t even pee without dancing a waltz. What are you thinking? Is this the kind of world where we hide our accomplishments? You’re a born dancer. Look how shapely your legs are."
"Ay, ’tis strong, and it does indifferent well in a dun-colored stock. Shall we set about some revels?","That’s true. They’re strong, and they look pretty good in brown tights. Should we throw a little dance party?"
What shall we do else? Were we not born under Taurus?,Why not? Weren’t we both born under Taurus?
Taurus! That’s sides and heart.,"Taurus! That governs the torso and heart, doesn’t it?"
"No, sir, it is legs and thighs. Let me see the caper. (SIR","No, the legs and thighs. Let me see you dance. (SIR ANDREW dances) Ha, higher! Ha, ha, excellent!"
"If the duke continue these favors towards you, Cesario, you are like to be much advanced. He hath known you but three days, and already you are no stranger.","If the Duke keeps treating you so well, Cesario, you’ll go far. He’s only known you for three days, but he’s already treating you like a close friend."
"You either fear his humor or my negligence, that you call in question the continuance of his love. Is he inconstant, sir, in his favors?","When you wonder whether he’ll keep treating me well, it makes me think his mood might change—or else I’ll mess up somehow. Do his feelings toward people change suddenly?"
"No, believe me.","No, not at all."
I thank you. Here comes the count.,Thanks for telling me. Here comes the Duke now.
"Who saw Cesario, ho?",Has anyone seen Cesario?
"On your attendance, my lord, here.","I’m right here, my lord, at your service."
"(to VIOLA and attendants) Stand you a while aloof. (to VIOLA) Cesario, Thou know’st no less but all. I have unclasped To thee the book even of my secret soul. Be not denied access, stand at her doors, And tell them there thy fixed foot shall grow Till thou have audience.","(to VIOLA and attendants) We’ll need some privacy for a little while. (to VIOLA) Cesario, I want a word with you. You know everything about me. I’ve told you all the secrets of my soul. So please go to her house; if they don’t let you in, plant yourself outside her door and tell them you won’t leave until they let you see her."
"Sure, my noble lord, If she be so abandoned to her sorrow","But my lord, I’m sure that if she’s as depressed as people say, she’ll never let me in."
"Be clamorous, and leap all civil bounds, Rather than make unprofited return.","Be loud and obnoxious. Do whatever it takes, just get the job done."
"Say I do speak with her, my lord, what then?","Well, all right, let’s say hypothetically that I do get a chance to speak with her, my lord. What do I do then?"
"O, then unfold the passion of my love, It shall become thee well to act my woes; She will attend it better in thy youth Than in a nuncio’s of more grave aspect.","Tell her how passionately I love her. Overwhelm her with examples of how faithful I am. The best thing would be to act out my feelings for her. She’ll pay more attention to a young guy like you than to an older, more serious man."
"I think not so, my lord.","I don’t think so, my lord."
"Dear lad, believe it. That say thou art a man. Diana’s lip Is not more smooth and rubious. Thy small pipe Is as the maiden’s organ, shrill and sound, And all is semblative a woman’s part. For this affair. (to CURIO and attendants) Some four or five attend him. All, if you will, for I myself am best When least in company. (to VIOLA) Prosper well in this, And thou shalt live as freely as thy lord,","My boy, it’s true. Anyone who says you’re a man must not notice how young you are. Your lips are as smooth and red as the goddess Diana’s. Your soft voice is like a young girl’s, high and clear, and the rest of you is pretty feminine too. I know you’re the right person for this job. (to CURIO and attendants) Four or five of you go along with him, or you can all go if you like. I’m most comfortable when I’m alone. (to VIOLA) If you succeed at this assignment, I’ll reward you well. My whole fortune will be yours."
"I’ll do my best To woo your lady—(aside) Yet, a barful strife— Whoe'er I woo, myself would be his wife.",I’ll do my best to make this lady love you.—(to herself) But what a tough task!—I have to go matchmaking for the man I want to marry myself!
"Nay, either tell me where thou hast been, or I will not open my lips so wide as a bristle may enter in way of thy excuse. My lady will hang thee for thy absence.","No. Either tell me where you’ve been, or I won’t make any excuses for you to Lady Olivia. Lady Olivia will have you executed for not showing up."
Let her hang me. He that is well hanged in this world needs to fear no colors.,So let her execute me. Anyone who’s executed doesn’t have to be afraid of anything he sees.
Make that good.,How do you know?
He shall see none to fear.,"Well, he’ll be dead, so he won’t see anything."
"A good lenten answer. I can tell thee where that saying was born, of “I fear no colors.”","That’s a lame answer. By the way, I know where you get all your brave talk about not being afraid of anything."
"Where, good Mistress Mary?","Where, good Miss Mary?"
In the wars. And that may you be bold to say in your foolery.,"From soldiers. But you’ll never see the front lines. It’s easy for you to talk about bravery, working as a fool in this palace."
"Well, God give them wisdom that have it. And those that are fools, let them use their talents.","Well, we all have our special gifts. Some people are born wise; those of us who were meant to be fools should do what they do best."
"Yet you will be hanged for being so long absent. Or to be turned away, is not that as good as a hanging to you?","But still, she’s going to kill you for being gone so long. Or at least fire you. And wouldn’t that be as bad for you as being killed?"
"Many a good hanging prevents a bad marriage, and, for turning away, let summer bear it out.","Sometimes getting killed is a good way to avoid getting married. And as for being fired, it’s summer, so it won’t be that bad to be homeless."
"You are resolute, then?","You’ve made up your mind, then?"
"Not so, neither, but I am resolved on two points.","No, but I’ve made up my mind on two points."
"That if one break, the other will hold. Or, if both break, your gaskins fall.","Ah yes, the two points where your suspenders are attached to your buttons. If one breaks, the other will hold, but if both points break, your pants will fall down."
"Apt, in good faith, very apt. Well, go thy way. If Sir Toby would leave drinking, thou wert as witty a piece of Eve’s flesh as any in Illyria.","Clever, very clever. Well, go along now. You’d be the funniest person in Illyria… if Sir Toby ever stopped drinking."
"Peace, you rogue, no more o' that. Here comes my lady. Make your excuse wisely, you were best.","Shut up, you troublemaker, no more of that. Here comes my lady. If you know what’s good for you, you’ll think up some good excuse for being away so long."
"(aside) Wit, an ’t be thy will, put me into good fooling! Those wits, that think they have thee, do very oft prove fools. And I, that am sure I lack thee, may pass for a wise man. For what says Quinapalus? “Better a witty fool, than a foolish wit.”","(to himself) Please, let me think of something funny to say now! Smart people who think they’re witty often turn out to be fools, but I know I’m not witty, so I might pass for smart. What did that philosopher Quinapalus Quinapalus is a made-up name Quinapalus say? Ah yes, “A witty fool’s better than a foolish wit.”"
"God bless thee, lady!","Greetings to you, madam!"
Take the fool away.,Get that fool out of here.
"Do you not hear, fellows? Take away the lady.","Didn’t you hear her, guys? Get the lady out of here."
"Go to, you’re a dry fool. I’ll no more of you. Besides, you grow dishonest.","Oh, go away, you’re a boring fool. I don’t want to have anything to do with you anymore. Besides, you’ve gotten unreliable."
"Two faults, madonna, that drink and good counsel will amend. For give the dry fool drink, then is the fool not dry. Bid the dishonest man mend himself. If he mend, he is no longer dishonest. If he cannot, let the botcher mend him. Anything that’s mended is but patched. Virtue that transgresses is but patched with sin, and sin that amends is but patched with virtue. If that this simple syllogism will serve, so. If it will not, what remedy? As there is no true cuckold but calamity, so beauty’s a flower. The lady bade take away the fool. Therefore, I say again, take her away.","Madam, those are two character flaws that a little booze and some common sense can fix. If you hand a drink to a sober fool, he won’t be thirsty anymore. If you tell a bad man to mend his wicked ways, and he does, he won’t be bad anymore. If he cannot, let the tailor mend him. Anything that’s mended is only patched up. A good person who does something wrong is only patched up with sin. And a sinner who does something good is only patched up with goodness. If this logic works, that’s great. If not, what can you do about it? Since the only real betrayed husband in the world is the one deserted by Lady Luck—because we’re all married to her—beauty is a flower. The lady gave orders to take away the fool, so I’m telling you again, take her away."
"Sir, I bade them take away you.",I told them to take you away.
"Misprision in the highest degree! Lady, Cucullus non facit monachum—that’s as much to say as I wear not motley in my brain. Good madonna, give me leave to prove you a fool.","Oh, what a big mistake! Madam, you can’t judge a book by its cover. I mean, I may look like a fool, but my mind’s sharp. Please let me prove you’re a fool."
Can you do it?,Can you do that?
"Dexterously, good madonna.","Easily, madam."
Make your proof.,Then go ahead and prove it.
"I must catechise you for it, madonna. Good my mouse of virtue, answer me.","I’ll have to ask you some questions, madam. Please answer, my good little student."
"Well, sir, for want of other idleness, I’ll bide your proof.",I’m listening to you only because I’ve got nothing better to do.
"Good madonna, why mournest thou?","My dear madam, why are you in mourning?"
"Good fool, for my brother’s death.","My dear fool, because my brother died."
"I think his soul is in hell, madonna.","I think his soul’s in hell, my lady."
"I know his soul is in heaven, fool.","I know his soul’s in heaven, fool."
"The more fool, madonna, to mourn for your brother’s soul being in heaven. Take away the fool, gentlemen.","Then you’re a fool for being sad that your brother’s soul is in heaven. Take away this fool, gentlemen."
"What think you of this fool, Malvolio? Doth he not mend?","What do you think of this fool, Malvolio? Isn’t he getting funnier?"
"Yes, and shall do till the pangs of death shake him. Infirmity, that decays the wise, doth ever make the better fool.","Yes, and he’ll keep getting funnier till he dies. Old age always makes people act funny—even wise people, but fools more than anybody."
"God send you, sir, a speedy infirmity, for the better increasing your folly! Sir Toby will be sworn that I am no fox, but he will not pass his word for two pence that you are no fool.","I hope you go senile soon, sir, so you can become a more foolish fool! Sir Toby would bet a fortune that I’m not smart, but he wouldn’t bet two cents that you’re not a fool."
"How say you to that, Malvolio?","What do you say to that, Malvolio?"
I saw him put down the other day with an ordinary fool that,I’m surprised you enjoy the company of this stupid troublemaker. The other day I saw him defeated in a
"has no more brain than a stone. Look you now, he’s out of his guard already. Unless you laugh and minister occasion to him, he is gagged. I protest I take these wise men that crow so at these set kind of fools no better than the fools' zanies.","battle of wits by an ordinary jester with no more brains than a rock. Look at him, he’s at a loss for words already. Unless he’s got somebody laughing at him, he can’t think of anything to say. I swear, anyone smart who laughs at these courts jesters is nothing but a jester’s apprentice."
"Oh, you are sick of self-love, Malvolio, and taste with a distempered appetite. To be generous, guiltless, and of free disposition is to take those things for bird-bolts that you deem cannon-bullets. There is no slander in an allowed fool, though he do nothing but rail. Nor no railing in a known discreet man, though he do nothing but reprove.","Malvolio, your vanity is damaging your good taste. If you were generous, innocent, and good-natured, you wouldn’t get so upset by what the fool says. You’d think of his wisecracks as harmless little firecrackers, not hurtful bullets. A court jester isn’t really criticizing people, even if he does nothing but make fun of them all day long. And a wise person doesn’t make fun of people, even if all he does is criticize them."
"Now Mercury endue thee with leasing, for thou speakest well of fools!",You speak so highly of fools! I hope the god of deception rewards you by making you a wonderful liar.
"Madam, there is at the gate a young gentleman much desires to speak with you.","Madam, there’s a young gentleman at the gate who really wants to speak to you."
"From the Count Orsino, is it?",Was he sent by Count Orsino?
"I know not, madam. 'Tis a fair young man, and well attended.","I don’t know, madam. He’s a good-looking young man, and there are a lot of people with him."
Who of my people hold him in delay?,Who’s talking to him now?
"Sir Toby, madam, your kinsman.","Sir Toby, madam, your relative."
"Fetch him off, I pray you. He speaks nothing but madman. Fie on him!","Send Toby away, please. He talks nothing but nonsense."
"Go you, Malvolio. If it be a suit from the count, I am sick, or not at home. What you will, to dismiss it.","Go out and talk to this visitor, Malvolio. If he’s got a message from the count, tell him I’m sick, or not home. Tell him anything you want, as long as you make him go away."
"Now you see, sir, how your fooling grows old, and people dislike it.","Now you see how your fooling gets boring, and people don’t like it."
"Thou hast spoke for us, madonna, as if thy eldest son should be a fool, whose skull Jove cram with brains, for— here he comes—one of thy kin has a most weak pia mater.","Madam, you’ve spoken so highly of us fools, you’d think your oldest son was going into that line of work. I hope God crams his skull full of brains, because here comes one of your relatives who’s pretty weak in the head."
"By mine honor, half-drunk. What is he at the gate, cousin?","I swear, he’s half drunk already. Who’s that at the gate, uncle?"
A gentleman.,A gentleman.
A gentleman? What gentleman?,A gentleman? What gentleman?
'Tis a gentleman here—a plague o' these pickle herring!,"There’s some gentleman out there.—(belching) Damn these pickled herring! They upset my stomach. How’s it going, fool?"
Good Sir Toby!,Good Sir Toby!
"Cousin, cousin, how have you come so early by this lethargy?","Uncle, uncle, how are you already so brain-dead so early in the day?"
Lechery! I defy lechery. There’s one at the gate.,"Brain-dead! Nonsense. I defy brain-death! I told you, someone’s at the gate."
"Ay, marry, what is he?","Yes, but who is he?"
"Let him be the devil, an he will, I care not. Give me faith, say I. Well, it’s all one.","Let him be the devil if he wants to, I don’t care. God will protect me. What do I care who it is?"
"What’s a drunken man like, fool?","Tell me what a drunk is like, fool."
"Like a drowned man, a fool and a madman. One draught above heat makes him a fool, the second mads him, and a third drowns him.","He’s a fool, a madman, and a drowned man. The first drink makes him a fool, the second makes him crazy, and the third drowns him."
"Go thou and seek the crowner, and let him sit o' my coz. For he’s in the third degree of drink, he’s drowned. Go look after him.","Go find the coroner and tell him to perform an inquest on my uncle, because he’s in the third degree of drunkenness—he’s drowned. Go take care of him."
"He is but mad yet, madonna, and the fool shall look to the madman.",He’s still only in the crazy phase. The fool will go take care of the madman.
"Madam, yond young fellow swears he will speak with you. I told him you were sick. He takes on him to understand so much, and therefore comes to speak with you. I told him you were asleep. He seems to have a foreknowledge of that too, and therefore comes to speak with you. What is to be said to him, lady? He’s fortified against any denial.","Madam, that young man out there says he’s got to speak to you. I told him you were sick. He claimed he knew that, and that’s why he’s come to speak with you. I told him you were asleep. He claimed to know that already too, and said that’s the reason he’s come to speak with you. What can I say to him, lady? He’s got an answer for everything."
Tell him he shall not speak with me.,Tell him he’s not going to speak with me.
"Has been told so, and he says he’ll stand at your door like a sheriff’s post, and be the supporter to a bench, but he’ll speak with you.",I told him that. He says he’ll stand at your door like a signpost or a bench until he speaks with you.
What kind o' man is he?,What kind of man is he?
"Why, of mankind.","Just a man, like any other."
What manner of man?,But what’s he like?
"Of very ill manner. He’ll speak with you, will you or no.",He’s very rude. He insists he’ll speak with you whether you want him to or not.
Of what personage and years is he?,What does he look like? How old is he?
"Not yet old enough for a man, nor young enough for a boy, as a squash is before ’tis a peascod, or a codling when ’tis almost an apple. 'Tis with him in standing water, between boy and man. He is very well-favored, and he speaks very shrewishly. One would think his mother’s milk were scarce out of him.","Not old enough to be a man, but not young enough to be a boy. He’s like a bud before it becomes a pea pod, or like a little green apple before it gets big and ripe. He’s somewhere between boy and man. He’s very handsome and speaks well, but he’s very young. He looks like he just recently stopped breastfeeding."
Let him approach. Call in my gentlewoman.,Show him in. Call in my maid.
"Gentlewoman, my lady calls.","Maria, our lady wants you."
"Give me my veil. Come, throw it o'er my face. (OLIVIA puts on a veil) We’ll once more hear Orsino’s embassy.","Give me my veil. Come, put it over my face. (OLIVIA puts on her veil) We’re going to hear Orsino’s pleas again."
"The honorable lady of the house, which is she?",Which one of you is the lady of the house?
Speak to me. I shall answer for her. Your will?,You can speak to me. I represent her. What do you want?
"Most radiant, exquisite and unmatchable beauty—I pray you, tell me if this be the lady of the house, for I never saw her. I would be loath to cast away my speech, for besides that it is excellently well penned, I have taken great pains to con it. Good beauties, let me sustain no scorn. I am very comptible, even to the least sinister usage.","What stunning, exquisite, and unmatchable beauty—but please, tell me if you’re the lady of the house, because I’ve never seen her. I’d hate to waste my speech on the wrong person, because It’s very well written and I spent a lot of time and energy memorizing it. Beautiful ladies, please don’t treat me badly. I’m very sensitive, and even the smallest bit of rudeness hurts my feelings."
"Whence came you, sir?","Where do you come from, sir?"
"I can say little more than I have studied, and that question’s out of my part. Good gentle one, give me modest assurance if you be the lady of the house, that I may proceed in my speech.","I’m sorry, but I memorized what I’m supposed to say here today, and that question isn’t part of the speech I learned. Please, my lady, just confirm that you’re the lady of the house so I can get on with my speech."
Are you a comedian?,Are you an actor?
"No, my profound heart. And yet, by the very fangs of malice I swear, I am not that I play. Are you the lady of the house?","No, madam. But I swear I’m not the person I’m playing. Are you the lady of the house?"
"If I do not usurp myself, I am.","I am, unless I somehow stole this role."
"Most certain, if you are she, you do usurp yourself, for what is yours to bestow is not yours to reserve. But this is from my commission. I will on with my speech in your praise and then show you the heart of my message.","If you’re the lady of the house, then it’s true you’re stealing your role, because what’s yours to give away is not yours to keep for yourself. But that’s not part of what I’m supposed to say. I’ll go on with my speech praising you, and then I’ll get to the point."
Come to what is important in ’t. I forgive you the praise.,Get to the point now. I’ll let you get away with skipping the praise.
"Alas, I took great pains to study it, and ’tis poetical.","That’s too bad, because I spent a long time memorizing it, and it’s poetic."
"It is the more like to be feigned. I pray you, keep it in. I heard you were saucy at my gates and allowed your approach rather to wonder at you than to hear you. If you be not mad, be gone. If you have reason, be brief. 'Tis not that time of moon with me to make one in so skipping a dialogue.","That means it’s more likely to be fake. Please, keep it to yourself. I heard you were rude when you were standing outside my gate, and that’s the only reason I let you in. I was curious. But I don’t necessarily want to listen to you. If you’re just insane, then get out of here. If you’re in your right mind, get to the point. I’ve got no patience for lunacy at the moment, and I don’t want to waste my time on ridiculous conversations."
"Will you hoist sail, sir? Here lies your way.","Ready to set sail, sir? The door’s right here."
"No, good swabber, I am to hull here a little longer. Some mollification for your giant, sweet lady.","No, this boat’s docking here a bit longer, little sailor.—My lady, would you mind asking your giant here to back off a bit?"
Tell me your mind.,Tell me what you want.
I am a messenger.,I have a message to deliver.
"Sure, you have some hideous matter to deliver, when the courtesy of it is so fearful. Speak your office.","It must be a message about something horrible, since you deliver it so rudely. Tell me what it’s about."
"It alone concerns your ear. I bring no overture of war, no taxation of homage. I hold the olive in my hand. My words are as full of peace as matter.",It’s about you. I’m not bringing any declarations of war or demands for cash. I’m coming in peace.
Yet you began rudely. What are you? What would you?,But you began so rudely. Who are you? What do you want?
"The rudeness that hath appeared in me have I learned from my entertainment. What I am and what I would are as secret as maidenhead. To your ears, divinity. To any other’s, profanation.","If I seemed rude, it’s because of how badly I was treated when I got here. Who I am and what I want are a secret. You’re the only one I can share the secret with. It’s sacred, just for you. It’s not for anyone else to hear."
Give us the place alone. We will hear this divinity.,"Everyone, please leave us alone for a moment. I’ve got a “sacred” secret to hear."
"Now, sir, what is your text?","Now, sir, what’s this holy secret you wanted to tell me?"
Most sweet lady—,Most sweet lady—
"A comfortable doctrine, and much may be said of it. Where lies your text?","Oh, “sweet”! It sounds like a nice and gentle kind of faith. Where’s the passage of holy scripture that you’re basing your sermon on?"
In Orsino’s bosom.,In Orsino’s heart.
In his bosom? In what chapter of his bosom?,In his heart? In what chapter and verse of his heart?
"To answer by the method, in the first of his heart.",The table of contents says it’s in the first chapter of his heart.
"Oh, I have read it. It is heresy. Have you no more to say?","Oh, I’ve read that. That’s not holy, it’s heresy. Do you have anything else to say?"
"Good madam, let me see your face.","Madam, please let me see your face."
"Have you any commission from your lord to negotiate with my face? You are now out of your text. But we will draw the curtain and show you the picture. Look you, sir, such a one I was this present. Is ’t not well done?","Has your lord given you any orders to negotiate with my face? I don’t think so. You’re overstepping your bounds now. But I’ll open the curtain and let you see the picture. Look, sir, this is a portrait of me as I am at this particular moment. It’s pretty well done, isn’t it?"
"Excellently done, if God did all.","It was done excellently, if it’s all-natural, the way God made it."
"'Tis in grain, sir. 'Twill endure wind and weather.","Oh, it’s all-natural, sir. Wind and rain can’t wash it off."
"'Tis beauty truly blent, whose red and white Nature’s own sweet and cunning hand laid on. If you will lead these graces to the grave And leave the world no copy.","That’s true beauty. Mother Nature herself painted your skin so white and your lips so red. My lady, you’d be the cruelest woman alive if you let your beauty die with you, with no children to inherit your good looks for future generations to enjoy."
"O, sir, I will not be so hard-hearted. I will give out divers schedules of my beauty. It shall be inventoried, and every particle and utensil labeled to my will: as, item, two lips indifferent red; item, two grey eyes, with lids to them; item, one neck, one chin, and so forth. Were you sent hither to praise me?","Oh, I’d never be that cruel. I’ll definitely do as you say and leave my beauty for the rest of the world to enjoy. I’ll write out a detailed inventory of my beauty and label every part. For example—item: two lips, ordinary red. Item: two gray eyes, with lids on them. Item: one neck, one chin, and so on. Anyway, were you sent here just to tell me I’m beautiful?"
"I see you what you are, you are too proud. My lord and master loves you. Oh, such love Could be but recompensed though you were crowned The nonpareil of beauty.","I see what you’re like. You’re proud. But you’d still be gorgeous even if you were as proud as the devil. My lord loves you. You should return a love as deep as his, even if you’re the most beautiful woman in the world."
How does he love me?,How does he love me?
"With adorations, fertile tears,",He adores you. He cries and groans and sighs.
"Your lord does know my mind. I cannot love him. Yet I suppose him virtuous, know him noble, Of great estate, of fresh and stainless youth.","Your lord knows what I think. I can’t love him. I’m sure he’s a very nice man. I know he’s noble, rich, young, and with a fine reputation. People say he’s generous, well educated, and brave, and he’s very attractive."
"In voices well divulged, free, learned, and valiant; A gracious person. But yet I cannot love him; He might have took his answer long ago.",But I just can’t love him. He should have resigned himself to that a long time ago.
"If I did love you in my master’s flame, With such a suffering, such a deadly life, I would not understand it.","If I loved you as passionately as my master does, and suffered like he does, your rejection would make no sense to me. I wouldn’t understand it."
"Why, what would you?",What would you do about it?
"Make me a willow cabin at your gate And call upon my soul within the house. Write loyal cantons of contemned love Halloo your name to the reverberate hills And make the babbling gossip of the air Cry out “Olivia!” Oh, you should not rest Between the elements of air and earth,","I’d build myself a sad little cabin near your house, where my soul’s imprisoned. From that cabin I’d call out to my soul. I’d write sad songs about unrequited love and sing them loudly in the middle of the night. I’d shout your name to the hills and make the air echo with your name, “Olivia!” Oh, you wouldn’t be able to go anywhere without feeling sorry for me."
You might do much. What is your parentage?,Not bad; you might accomplish something. Who are your parents?
"Above my fortunes, yet my state is well. I am a gentleman.",I was born to a higher position than I’ve got now. But I’m still fairly high-ranking. I’m a gentleman.
Get you to your lord. I cannot love him. Let him send no more— To tell me how he takes it. Fare you well. I thank you for your pains. Spend this for me.,Go back to your lord. I can’t love him. Tell him not to send any more messengers—unless you feel like coming back to tell me how he took the bad news. Goodbye. Thanks for your trouble. Here’s some money for you.
"I am no fee’d post, lady. Keep your purse. My master, not myself, lacks recompense. And let your fervor, like my master’s, be Placed in contempt. Farewell, fair cruelty.","I’m not a paid messenger, my lady. Keep your money. It’s my master who’s not getting the reward he deserves, not me. I hope you fall in love with a man whose heart is hard as a rock and who treats your love like a big joke, just like you’ve done. Goodbye, you beautiful, cruel woman."
"“What is your parentage?” “Above my fortunes, yet my state is well. Thy tongue, thy face, thy limbs, actions, and spirit, Do give thee fivefold blazon. Not too fast! Soft, soft! Unless the master were the man. How now? Even so quickly may one catch the plague? With an invisible and subtle stealth To creep in at mine eyes. Well, let it be.— What ho, Malvolio!","“Who are your parents?” “I was born to a higher position than I’ve got now. But I’m still fairly high-ranking. I’m a gentleman.” Yes, I’m sure you are. Your way of talking, your face, your body, your behavior, and your sensitive soul all prove you’re a gentleman. Ah, no. Calm down, calm down. If only his lord were more like him. How strange I’m feeling! Can someone fall in love this quickly? I can feel this young man’s perfection creeping in through my eyes like some kind of disease, slowly and invisibly. Oh, well.—Malvolio! Come here!"
"Here, madam, at your service.","At your service, madam."
"Run after that same peevish messenger, Would I or not. Tell him I’ll none of it. OLIVIA hands him a ring Desire him not to flatter with his lord, Nor hold him up with hopes. I am not for him. I’ll give him reasons for ’t. Hie thee, Malvolio.","Run after that obnoxious messenger, the duke’s servant. He insisted on leaving this ring with me whether I wanted it or not. Tell him I want nothing to do with it. (she hands him a ring) Ask him not to encourage Orsino or to get his hopes up. I’m not for him. If that young man comes here again tomorrow, I’ll tell him why. Hurry, Malvolio."
"Madam, I will.","Madam, I will."
"I do I know not what and fear to find Mine eye too great a flatterer for my mind. What is decreed must be, and be this so.","I don’t know what I’m doing. I’m afraid I’m not using my head, and I’m falling for his good looks. Fate, do your work. We human beings don’t control our own destinies. What is fated to happen must happen. So let it happen!"
"Will you stay no longer, nor will you not that I go with you?",You won’t stay any longer? And you don’t want me to come with you?
"By your patience, no. My stars shine darkly over me. The malignancy of my fate might perhaps distemper yours. Therefore I shall crave of you your leave that I may bear my evils alone. It were a bad recompense for your love to lay any of them on you.","No, I’d rather you stayed here. My luck is pretty bad right now, and it might rub off on you. So just let me say goodbye and face the bad stuff alone—otherwise I wouldn’t be thanking you very well for all you’ve done for me."
Let me yet know of you whither you are bound.,At least tell me where you’re going.
"No, sooth, sir. My determinate voyage is mere extravagancy. But I perceive in you so excellent a touch of modesty that you will not extort from me what I am willing to keep in. Therefore it charges me in manners the rather to express myself. You must know of me then, Antonio, my name is Sebastian, which I called Roderigo. My father was that Sebastian of Messaline, whom I know you have heard of. He left behind him myself and a sister, both born in an hour. If the heavens had been pleased, would we had so ended! But you, sir, altered that, for some hour before you took me from the breach of the sea was my sister drowned.","Honestly, I can’t. I’m just wandering, with no particular destination. But I know you’d never force me to tell you things I don’t want to, so I should be polite and tell you what I can. My name’s Sebastian, though I’ve been calling myself Roderigo. My father was Sebastian of Messaline. I know you’ve heard of him. He’s dead now. He left behind myself and my twin sister, who was born in the same hour as me. If God had been willing, I wish we had died in the same hour too! But you kept that from happening. An hour before you pulled me out of the breaking waves, my sister drowned."
Alas the day!,How tragic!
"A lady, sir, though it was said she much resembled me, was yet of many accounted beautiful. But though I could not with such estimable wonder overfar believe that, yet thus far I will boldly publish her: she bore a mind that envy could not but call fair. She is drowned already, sir, with salt water, though I seem to drown her remembrance again with more.","Although many people said she looked like me, she was considered beautiful. And though I can’t believe everything people said about her beauty, I’ll be so bold as to say she had a beautiful mind. Even those who were jealous of her would have to admit that. She’s been drowned in salty sea water, and now my salty tears are about to drown her memory all over again."
"Pardon me, sir, your bad entertainment.","I’m sorry I wasn’t a better host for you, sir."
"O good Antonio, forgive me your trouble.","Oh, Antonio, I’m sorry I caused you so much trouble."
"If you will not murder me for my love, let me be your servant.",I care about you a lot. Please let me be your servant so I can be with you. You’ll be killing me if you don’t.
"If you will not undo what you have done—that is, kill him whom you have recovered—desire it not. Fare you well at once. My bosom is full of kindness, and I am yet so near the manners of my mother, that upon the least occasion more mine eyes will tell tales of me. I am bound to the Count Orsino’s court. Farewell.","If you don’t want to break my heart, then say goodbye to me right now. I like you very much. I’m really about to cry, just like my mother would do. I’m going to Count Orsino’s court. Goodbye."
"The gentleness of all the gods go with thee! I have many enemies in Orsino’s court, Else would I very shortly see thee there. That danger shall seem sport, and I will go.","I wish you all the best. If I didn’t have so many enemies in Orsino’s court, I’d go join you there. But who cares. I’m so crazy about you that danger doesn’t bother me. I’ll go anyway."
Were not you even now with the Countess Olivia?,"Excuse me, weren’t you with Countess Olivia just now?"
"Even now, sir. On a moderate pace I have since arrived but hither.","Yes, sir. I’ve only made it this far since I left her place, walking at a moderate pace."
"She returns this ring to you, sir. You might have saved me my pains to have taken it away yourself. She adds, moreover, that you should put your lord into a desperate assurance she will none of him. And one thing more, that you be never so hardy to come again in his affairs, unless it be to report your lord’s taking of this. Receive it so.","She’s sending this ring back to you, sir. You should’ve saved me some trouble and taken it away yourself. She wants you to make it very clear to your lord that she wants nothing to do with him, and that you should never come again on his behalf, unless you want to come back to tell her how he reacted to the bad news. Here, take the ring."
She took the ring of me. I’ll none of it.,She took that ring from me. I won’t take it back.
"Come, sir, you peevishly threw it to her, and her will is it should be so returned. (he throws down the ring) If it be worth stooping for, there it lies in your eye. If not, be it his that finds it.","You threw it at her rudely, and she wants you to take it back. (he throws down the ring) If it’s worth bending over to pick up, there it is on the ground, where you can see it. If not, whoever finds it can have it."
"Fortune forbid my outside have not charmed her! She made good view of me, indeed so much That sure methought her eyes had lost her tongue, For she did speak in starts distractedly. Invites me in this churlish messenger.","I didn’t give her any ring. What’s she trying to say? I hope she doesn’t have a crush on me! It’s true she looked at me a lot, in fact, she looked at me so much that she seemed distracted, and couldn’t really finish her sentences very well. Oh, I really think she loves me! She sent this rude messenger to tell me to come back, instead of coming herself, which would be indis-"
"None of my lord’s ring? Why, he sent her none. I am the man. If it be so, as ’tis, Poor lady, she were better love a dream. Wherein the pregnant enemy does much. How easy is it for the proper false In women’s waxen hearts to set their forms! Alas, our frailty is the cause, not we, How will this fadge? My master loves her dearly, And I, poor monster, fond as much on him, And she, mistaken, seems to dote on me. What will become of this? As I am man, As I am woman, now, alas the day, What thriftless sighs shall poor Olivia breathe! O time, thou must untangle this, not I. It is too hard a knot for me to untie!","creet. She doesn’t want Orsino’s ring! Orsino never sent her a ring. I’m the man she wants. If that’s true, which it is, she might as well be in love with a dream, the poor lady. Now I understand why it’s bad to wear disguises. Disguises help the devil do his work. It’s so easy for a good-looking but deceitful man to make women fall in love with him. It’s not our fault—we women are weak. We can’t help what we’re made of. Ah, how will this all turn out? My lord loves her, and. poor me, I love him just as much. And she’s deluded enough to be in love with me. What can possibly fix this situation? I’m pretending to be a man, so my love for the Duke is hopeless. And since I’m a woman—too bad I’m a woman—Olivia’s love for me is hopeless as well! Oh, only time can sort out this mess. I can’t figure it out by myself!"
"Approach, Sir Andrew. Not to be abed after midnight is to be up betimes, and diluculo surgere, thou know’st,—","Come on, Sir Andrew. If we’re still awake after midnight, then we’re up early in the morning. And the doctors say it’s healthy to get up early—"
"Nay, my troth, I know not. But I know to be up late is to be up late.",I don’t know what the doctors say. All I know is that staying up late is staying up late.
"A false conclusion. I hate it as an unfilled can. To be up after midnight and to go to bed then, is early, so that to go to bed after midnight is to go to bed betimes. Does not our life consist of the four elements?","A false conclusion. I hate your logic as much as I hate an empty drinking cup. Staying up after midnight means that you go to bed after midnight, in the wee hours of the morning, which is early. So it’s like going to bed early. Isn’t everybody made up of the four elements—earth, water, fire, and air?"
"Faith, so they say, but I think it rather consists of eating and drinking.","That’s what they say, but I think life consists of food and booze."
"Thou'rt a scholar. Let us therefore eat and drink. Marian, I say! A stoup of wine!",You’re a smart guy. So we should eat and drink. Maria! Bring us some wine!
"Here comes the fool, i' faith.","Look, here comes the fool."
"How now, my hearts! Did you never see the picture of “We","Hello, my friends! What a pretty picture, three fools all together."
"Welcome, ass. Now let’s have a catch.","Hello, you idiot. Sing us a song."
"By my troth, the fool has an excellent breast. I had rather than forty shillings I had such a leg, and so sweet a breath to sing, as the fool has.—(to the FOOL) In sooth, thou wast in very gracious fooling last night when thou spokest of Pigrogromitus, of the Vapians passing the equinoctial of Queubus. 'Twas very good, i' faith. I sent thee sixpence for thy leman. Hadst it?","I swear, this fool has an excellent singing voice. I’d give forty shillings to have his nice legs and his beautiful voice. (to the FOOL) Fool, you were very funny last night talking that astrological nonsense These are nonsense words that sound like astrology. astrological nonsense about Pigrogromitus and the Vapians passing the equinox of Queubus. Very amusing. I sent you some money to spend on your girlfriend. Did you get it?"
"I did impeticos thy gratillity, for Malvolio’s nose is no whipstock. My lady has a white hand, and the Myrmidons are no bottle-ale houses.","I gave your little present to my girlfriend because you can’t get a grip on Malvolio’s nose to whip your horse with it. My girlfriend has beautiful white hands, and great warriors aren’t mom-and-pop diners This is more nonsense to amuse Sir Andrew. mom-and-pop diners , you know."
"Excellent! Why, this is the best fooling when all is done. Now, a song.","Ha, ha! I love it when you talk nonsense—that’s what fools should do. Come on now, sing for us."
(giving money to the FOOL),"(giving the FOOL money) Yes, come on. Here’s sixpence for you. Let’s hear a song."
(giving money to the FOOL) There’s a testril of me too. If one knight give a—,(giving the FOOL money) Here’s something from me too. If one knight gives—
Would you have a love song or a song of good life?,Would you rather hear a love song or a song about the good life?
"A love song, a love song.","A love song, a love song."
"Ay, ay. I care not for good life.","Yes, yes. I’m not interested in being good."
"(sings) O mistress mine, where are you roaming? O, stay and hear! Your true love’s coming, That can sing both high and low: Journeys end in lovers meeting, Every wise man’s son doth know.","(he sings) Oh my lover, where are you roaming? Stay and listen! Your true love’s coming, the one who can sing both high and low: Don’t roam any further, pretty darling. Your journey ends when you meet a lover, as every wise man’s son knows."
"Excellent good, i' faith.","That was excellent, really excellent."
"Good, good.","Good, very good."
What is love? 'Tis not hereafter. Present mirth hath present laughter. What’s to come is still unsure. In delay there lies no plenty. Youth’s a stuff will not endure.,"(singing) What is love? It isn’t in the future. When you’re having fun now, you’re laughing right now. The future’s unsure, and there’s no reason to waste time. Come kiss me while you’re twenty. You won’t be young forever."
"A mellifluous voice, as I am true knight.","A beautiful voice, I swear."
A contagious breath.,His breath stinks.
"Very sweet and contagious, i' faith.","Yes, it stinks very sweetly."
"To hear by the nose, it is dulcet in contagion. But shall we make the welkin dance indeed? Shall we rouse the night owl in a catch that will draw three souls out of one weaver? Shall we do that?","If we could listen to him with our noses, we would definitely say he stinks very sweetly. So what do you say, should we sing loud enough to shake the heavens? Should we sing a round to wake up the night owl? Should we do that?"
"An you love me, let’s do ’t. I am dog at a catch.","Let’s go for it. I’m a very good singer, and can sing rounds like a dog dog = expert dog ."
"By 'r lady, sir, and some dogs will catch well.",Then you’ll be good at catchy tunes. Dogs like to play catch.
Most certain. Let our catch be “Thou Knave.”,Absolutely. Let’s dance to “You Jerk.”
"“Hold thy peace, thou knave,” knight? I shall be constrained in ’t to call thee knave, knight.","You mean, “Shut up, you jerk”? That’s the song where the singers call each other jerks, right? So I’ll be forced to call you a jerk, Sir Andrew."
'Tis not the first time I have constrained one to call me,"It won’t be the first time someone was forced to call me that. You start, Fool. It starts, “Shut up.”"
I shall never begin if I hold my peace.,I’ll never be able to start if I shut up.
"Good, i' faith. Come, begin.","That’s true. But come on, start."
"What a caterwauling do you keep here! If my lady have not called up her steward Malvolio and bid him turn you out of doors, never trust me.",You’re making a terrible racket out here! Lady Olivia told her servant Malvolio to kick you out of the house. I swear it’s true.
"My lady’s a Cataian. We are politicians, Malvolio’s a Peg- a-Ramsey, and (sings) Three merry men be we.—Am not I consanguineous? Am I not of her blood? Tillyvally! “Lady”! (sings) There dwelt a man in Babylon, lady, lady!","Lady Olivia can go to China for all I care. We’re very smart guys, and Malvolio’s Little Bo Peep. (he sings) We’re just having some fun.—Aren’t I her relative, after all? Aren’t we related? Fiddle-dee-dee, “Lady!” (singing) There lived a man in Babylon, lady, lady!"
"Beshrew me, the knight’s in admirable fooling.","Gosh, the knight’s very good at acting like a fool."
"Ay, he does well enough if he be disposed, and so do I too. He does it with a better grace, but I do it more natural.","Yes, he’s good at it when he’s in the mood, and so am I. He’s practiced more, but it comes more naturally to me."
(sings) O' the twelfth day of December—,(he sings) On the twelfth day of December—
"For the love o' God, peace!","For God’s sake, shut up!"
"My masters, are you mad? Or what are you? Have you no wit, manners, nor honesty but to gabble like tinkers at this time of night? Do you make an alehouse of my lady’s house, that you squeak out your coziers' catches without any mitigation or remorse of voice? Is there no respect of place, persons, nor time in you?","Are you all crazy? What’s wrong with you? Are you making all this noise at this time of night because you have no manners, or because you’re just stupid? Are you trying to turn my mistress’s house into a noisy bar? Is that why you’re squealing out these ridiculous vulgar songs without lowering your voices at all? Don’t you have any respect for anything?"
"We did keep time, sir, in our catches. Sneck up!","We respected the beat of the song, sir. So shut up!"
"Sir Toby, I must be round with you. My lady bade me tell you, that, though she harbors you as her kinsman, she’s nothing allied to your disorders. If you can separate yourself and your misdemeanors, you are welcome to the house. If not, an it would please you to take leave of her, she is very willing to bid you farewell.","Sir Toby, I’ve got to be frank with you. My lady told me to tell you that while she lets you stay at her house because you’re a relative, she doesn’t approve of your behavior. If you can shape up, you’re welcome to stay in the house. If you can’t, and would prefer to leave, she’s very willing to say goodbye to you."
"(sings) Farewell, dear heart, since I must needs be gone.","(he sings In this line and the following lines, Sir Toby and the fool are singing variations on the lyrics of a popular song of the day. sings ) Goodnight, sweetheart, I’m going to leave you now."
"Nay, good Sir Toby.","No, good Sir Toby."
(sings) His eyes do show his days are almost done.,(singing) You can tell from his eyes that his life is almost over.
Is ’t even so?,Is this how it’s going to be?
(sings) But I will never die.,(singing) But I will never die.
"(sings) Sir Toby, there you lie.","(singing) Sir Toby, that’s a lie."
This is much credit to you.,This behavior really makes you look great.
(sings) Shall I bid him go?,(singing) Should I tell him to go?
(sings) What an if you do?,"(singing) What if y,ou do?"
"(sings) Shall I bid him go, and spare not?","(singing) Should I tell him to go, and be harsh with him?"
"(sings) O no, no, no, no, you dare not.","(singing) Oh no, no, no, no, don’t you dare."
"Out o' tune, sir. You lie. Art any more than a steward? Dost thou think, because thou art virtuous, there shall be no more cakes and ale?","That’s out of tune, sir. You lie. (to MALVOLIO) You’re nothing more than a servant here. Do you think that just because you’re a goody two shoes, no one else can enjoy himself?"
"Yes, by Saint Anne, and ginger shall be hot i' the mouth too.","They certainly will. They’ll have double helpings, too."
"Thou'rt i' the right. Go, sir, rub your chain with crumbs. A stoup of wine, Maria!","You’re right. (to MALVOLIO) Go polish your steward’s chain, sir. Maria, bring us some wine!"
"Mistress Mary, if you prized my lady’s favor at anything more than contempt, you would not give means for this uncivil rule. She shall know of it, by this hand.","Miss Mary, if you cared what Lady Olivia thinks about you at all, you wouldn’t contribute to this rude behavior. I assure you, she’ll find out about this."
Go shake your ears!,Go and wiggle your ears!
"'Twere as good a deed as to drink when a man’s a-hungry, to challenge him the field and then to break promise with him and make a fool of him.",There’s nothing I’d love more than to make a fool out of that guy somehow. I could challenge him to a duel and then not show up. That would do the trick.
"Do ’t, knight. I’ll write thee a challenge. Or I’ll deliver thy indignation to him by word of mouth.",Do that. I’ll write a letter challenging him to a duel on your behalf. Or I’ll deliver your insults to his face.
"Sweet Sir Toby, be patient for tonight. Since the youth of the count’s was today with thy lady, she is much out of quiet. For Monsieur Malvolio, let me alone with him. If I do not gull him into a nayword and make him a common recreation, do not think I have wit enough to lie straight in my bed. I know I can do it.","Dear Sir Toby, don’t do anything rash tonight. Ever since the Duke’s messenger visited Olivia, she’s been upset. As for Monsieur Malvolio, let me take care of him. I’ll make a big fool out of him, just trust me. I’ll make him famous for his stupidity. Everyone will laugh at him. I know I can do it."
"Possess us, possess us, tell us something of him.","Tell us something about him. Come on, tell us something."
"Marry, sir, sometimes he is a kind of puritan.","Well, sometimes he acts like a goody two shoes."
"O, if I thought that, I’d beat him like a dog!","Oh, I’ll beat him up for that!"
"What, for being a puritan? Thy exquisite reason, dear knight?","You’re going to beat him up for being good? And what’s your brilliant reason for that, please?"
"I have no exquisite reason for ’t, but I have reason good enough.","I don’t have any “brilliant” reason for it, but I have a good enough reason."
"The devil a puritan that he is, or anything constantly, but a time-pleaser; an affectioned ass that cons state without book and utters it by great swarths; the best persuaded of himself, so crammed, as he thinks, with excellencies, that it is his grounds of faith that all that look on him love him. And on that vice in him will my revenge find notable cause to work.","He isn’t really that pure and good. He’s just a conceited flatterer. He’s a pretentious guy who aspires to speak and act like nobility. He’s proud, and he thinks he’s so stuffed full of wonderful qualities that everyone loves him. That’s the weakness I’ll use to get revenge on him."
What wilt thou do?,What are you going to do?
"I will drop in his way some obscure epistles of love, wherein by the color of his beard, the shape of his leg, the manner of his gait, the expressure of his eye, forehead, and complexion,he shall find himself most feelingly personated.","I’ll drop some mysterious love letters in his path. He’ll think they’re addressed to him, because they’ll describe the color of his beard, the shape of his legs, the way he walks, and the expression on his face. I can make my handwriting look just like Lady Olivia’s: she"
I can write very like my lady your niece: on a forgotten matter we can hardly make distinction of our hands.,and I can’t tell the difference between each other’s handwriting.
Excellent! I smell a device.,Excellent! Sounds like you’ve got a good trick in mind.
I have ’t in my nose too.,I like it too.
"He shall think, by the letters that thou wilt drop, that they come from my niece, and that she’s in love with him.",He’ll think these letters are from Olivia and that she’s in love with him.
"My purpose is, indeed, a horse of that color.","Yes, that’s the idea."
And your horse now would make him an ass.,He’s going to look like a total idiot.
"Ass, I doubt not.","Absolutely, you idiot."
"Oh, ’twill be admirable!",This is going to be great!
"Sport royal, I warrant you. I know my physic will work with him. I will plant you two, and let the fool make a third, where he shall find the letter. Observe his construction of it. For this night, to bed, and dream on the event. Farewell.","It’s going to be fun, I promise. I know my medicine will work on him. I’ll have you two hide—and the fool too—right where he’ll find the letter. Watch his reaction. Meanwhile, let’s go to bed and dream about this. Good night."
"Good night, Penthesilea.","Good night, you amazing woman, you."
"Before me, she’s a good wench.","She’s a fine woman, all right."
"She’s a beagle, true-bred, and one that adores me. What o' that?","She’s a good little woman, and she adores me. What about it?"
I was adored once too.,"Someone adored me once, too."
"Let’s to bed, knight. Thou hadst need send for more money.","Let’s go to bed, knight. Tomorrow you need to get more money sent to you."
"If I cannot recover your niece, I am a foul way out.","If I can’t persuade your niece to marry me, I’m going to be in some serious financial trouble."
"Send for money, knight. If thou hast her not i' the end, call me “Cut.”",Get your hands on some money and everything will be all right. I know you’ll win over Olivia in the end.
"If I do not, never trust me, take it how you will.","I know I will too, if it’s the last thing I do."
"Come, come, I’ll go burn some sack. 'Tis too late to go to bed now. Come, knight. Come, knight.","Come on, I’ll go warm up a nice glass of sherry for us. It’s too late to go to bed now. Come on, my friend, come on."
"Give me some music. (music plays) Now, good morrow, friends.— Now, good Cesario, but that piece of song, That old and antique song we heard last night. More than light airs and recollected terms Of these most brisk and giddy-paced times: Come, but one verse.","Play me some music. (music plays) Good morning, my friends.—Have them sing me that song again, Cesario, that old-fashioned song someone sang last night. It made me feel better and took my mind off my troubles much better than the silly songs they sing nowadays. Please, have them sing just one verse."
"He is not here, so please your lordship, that should sing it.","Sir, the person who should sing that song isn’t here."
Who was it?,Who was it?
"Feste, the jester, my lord, a fool that the lady Olivia’s father took much delight in. He is about the house.","Feste, the jester, my lord. Olivia’s father used to like him. He’s somewhere else in the house."
"Seek him out, and play the tune the while.","Then go find him. Meanwhile, play the tune."
"(to VIOLA) Come hither, boy. If ever thou shalt love, For such as I am, all true lovers are, Unstaid and skittish in all motions else Save in the constant image of the creature That is beloved. How dost thou like this tune?","(to VIOLA) Come here, boy. If you ever fall in love and feel the bittersweet pain it brings, think of me. Because the way I am now, moody and unable to focus on anything except the face of the woman I love, is exactly how all true lovers are. What do you think of this song?"
Where Love is throned.,It really makes you feel what a lover feels.
"Thou dost speak masterly. My life upon ’t, young though thou art, thine eye Hath stay’d upon some favor that it loves. Hath it not, boy?","You’re absolutely right. I’d bet my life that, as young as you are, you’ve fallen in love with someone. Haven’t you, boy?"
"A little, by your favor.",A little bit.
What kind of woman is’t?,What kind of woman is she?
Of your complexion.,She’s a lot like you.
"She is not worth thee, then. What years, i' faith?","She’s not good enough for you, then. How old is she?"
"About your years, my lord.","About as old as you are, my lord."
"Too old by heaven. Let still the woman take An elder than herself. So wears she to him, For, boy, however we do praise ourselves, Our fancies are more giddy and unfirm, More longing, wavering, sooner lost and worn, Than women’s are.","That’s definitely too old. A woman should always pick an older man. That way she’ll adjust herself to what her husband wants, and the husband will be happy and faithful to her. Because however much we like to brag, boy, the truth is that we men change our minds a lot more than women do, and our desires come and go a lot faster than theirs."
"I think it well, my lord.","I think you’re right, sir."
"Or thy affection cannot hold the bent. For women are as roses, whose fair flower Being once displayed, doth fall that very hour.","So find someone younger to love, or you won’t be able to maintain your feelings. Women are like roses: the moment their beauty is in full bloom, it’s about to decay."
"And so they are. Alas, that they are so,",That’s true. It’s too bad their beauty fades right when it reaches perfection!
"O, fellow, come, the song we had last night.— Mark it, Cesario, it is old and plain; The spinsters and the knitters in the sun And the free maids that weave their thread with bones And dallies with the innocence of love, Like the old age.","My friend, sing us the song you sang last night.—Listen to it carefully, Cesario, it’s a simple old song. Spinners and knitters used to sing it while they sewed, and maidens used to sing it over their weaving. It tells the simple truth about innocent love, as it was in the good old days."
"Are you ready, sir?","Are you ready, sir?"
"Ay; prithee, sing.","Yes. Please, sing."
"(sings) And in sad cypress let me be laid. Fly away, fly away breath, I am slain by a fair cruel maid. My shroud of white, stuck all with yew, My part of death, no one so true Did share it. Not a flower, not a flower sweet On my black coffin let there be strown. My poor corpse, where my bones shall be thrown. A thousand thousand sighs to save, Lay me, O, where Sad true lover never find my grave,","(he sings) Come on, let me die now And put my body in a dark coffin. I feel my breath leaving me. I’ve been killed by a beautiful girl. Prepare my shroud of white, Adorned with sprigs of yew-tree. I’m the most faithful person Who ever lived or died. Don’t scatter sweet flowers On my black coffin. Don’t let my friends See my poor corpse. I don’t want to hear sad sighs, So bury me where no sad lovers can find my grave to weep over it!"
(giving money) There’s for thy pains.,(giving the FOOL money) Here’s some money for your trouble.
"No pains, sir. I take pleasure in singing, sir.","No trouble, sir. I like singing."
I’ll pay thy pleasure then.,Then I’ll pay you for doing what you like.
"Truly, sir, and pleasure will be paid, one time or another.","Well, in that case, all right. We all pay for what we like sooner or later."
Give me now leave to leave thee.,You may leave.
"Now, the melancholy god protect thee, and the tailor make thy doublet of changeable taffeta, for thy mind is a very opal. I would have men of such constancy put to sea, that their business might be everything and their intent everywhere, for that’s it that always makes a good voyage of nothing. Farewell.","I’ll pray for the god of sadness to protect you, sir. And I hope your tailor will make you an outfit out of fabric that changes color, because your mind is like an opal that changes colors constantly. Men as wonderfully changeable as you are should all go drifting on the sea, where they can do whatever comes their way, and go wherever the current takes them. Those are the men whose trips are always successful. Goodbye."
Let all the rest give place.,All the rest of you can leave too.
"Once more, Cesario, Get thee to yond same sovereign cruelty. Tell her my love, more noble than the world, The parts that fortune hath bestowed upon her, Tell her, I hold as giddily as fortune; But ’tis that miracle and queen of gems That nature pranks her in attracts my soul.","Cesario, go visit that cruel Olivia one more time. Tell her my love is purer than anything else in the whole world, and has nothing to do with her property. The wealth she’s inherited isn’t what makes me value her. It’s her rich, jewel-like beauty that attracts me."
"But if she cannot love you, sir?","But if she can’t love you, sir?"
I cannot be so answer’d.,I refuse to accept that.
"Sooth, but you must. Say that some lady, as perhaps there is, Hath for your love a great a pang of heart As you have for Olivia. You cannot love her.","But you have to. Just imagine some lady might exist who loves you as powerfully and agonizingly as you love Olivia. But you can’t love her, and you tell her so. Shouldn’t she just accept that?"
"There is no woman’s sides Can bide the beating of so strong a passion As love doth give my heart. No woman’s heart So big, to hold so much. They lack retention. No motion of the liver, but the palate, That suffer surfeit, cloyment, and revolt; But mine is all as hungry as the sea, And can digest as much. Make no compare And that I owe Olivia.","No woman is strong enough to put up with the kind of intense passion I feel. No woman’s heart is big enough to hold all my love. Women don’t feel love like that—love is as shallow as appetite for them. It has nothing to do with their hearts, just their sense of taste. They eat too much and get indigestion and nausea. But my love’s different. It’s as all-consuming and insatiable as the sea, and it can swallow as much as the sea can. Don’t compare a woman’s love for a man with my love for Olivia."
"Ay, but I know—","Yes, but I know—"
What dost thou know?,What do you know?
"Too well what love women to men may owe. In faith, they are as true of heart as we. As it might be, perhaps, were I a woman, I should your lordship.","I know a lot about the love women can feel for men. Actually, their hearts are as sensitive and loyal as ours are. My father had a daughter who loved a man in the same way that I might love you, if I were a woman."
And what’s her history?,And what’s her story?
"A blank, my lord. She never told her love, But let concealment, like a worm i' the bud, And with a green and yellow melancholy She sat like patience on a monument, Smiling at grief. Was not this love indeed? We men may say more, swear more, but indeed Much in our vows, but little in our love.","There was no story, my lord. She never told him she loved him. She kept her love bottled up inside her until it destroyed her, ruining her beauty. She pined away. She just sat waiting patiently, sadly, smiling despite her sadness. Her complexion turned greenish from depression. Doesn’t that sound like true love? We men might talk more and promise more, but in fact we talk more than we really feel. We might be great at making vows, but our love isn’t sincere."
"But died thy sister of her love, my boy?",But did your sister die of love?
"I am all the daughters of my father’s house, And all the brothers too—and yet I know not.","I am the only daughter in my father’s family, and all the brothers too—but I’m not completely sure about that. Anyway, sir, should I go see the lady?"
"Ay, that’s the theme. To her in haste. Give her this jewel. Say My love can give no place, bide no denay. (he hands her a jewel)","Yes, go quickly and give her this jewel. Tell her my love won’t go away and won’t be denied. (he hands her a jewel)"
"Come thy ways, Signior Fabian.","Come along with us, Signor Fabian."
"Nay, I’ll come. If I lose a scruple of this sport, let me be boiled to death with melancholy.","I’m coming, don’t worry. If I miss this, let me be boiled alive."
Wouldst thou not be glad to have the niggardly rascally sheep-biter come by some notable shame?,Won’t you be glad to see that rascal dog humiliated?
"I would exult, man. You know, he brought me out o' favor with my lady about a bear-baiting here.","I’ll be thrilled. You know, he got me in trouble with the lady of the house once when I arranged a bear-baiting here."
"To anger him, we’ll have the bear again, and we will fool him black and blue. Shall we not, Sir Andrew?","We’ll have another bear-baiting just to make him angry, and we’ll mock him till he’s black and blue. Won’t we, Sir Andrew?"
"An we do not, it is pity of our lives.","If we don’t, it’ll be the biggest disappointment of our lives."
Here comes the little villain.,Here comes the little villain herself.
"How now, my metal of India?","How are you, my golden girl?"
"Get you all three into the boxtree. Malvolio’s coming down this walk. He has been yonder i' the sun practising behavior to his own shadow this half hour. Observe him, for the love of mockery, for I know this letter will make a contemplative idiot of him. Close, in the name of jesting!","Hide behind the boxwood hedge, all three of you. Malvolio’s coming down the path. He’s been over there practicing how to act for the past half hour. Watch him carefully if you want to have some fun, guys. This letter’s going to turn him into a starry-eyed idiot. Now hide, for God’s sake!"
"Lie thou there (throwing down a letter), for here comes the trout that must be caught with tickling.","Now, you lie there on the path. (MARIA throws down a letter) Here comes the fish that’s going to gobble up our bait."
"'Tis but fortune, all is fortune. Maria once told me she did affect me, and I have heard herself come thus near, that, should she fancy, it should be one of my complexion. Besides, she uses me with a more exalted respect than anyone else that follows her. What should I think on ’t?","It’s all luck. Everything’s luck. Maria once told me Olivia was fond of me. I’ve almost heard Olivia say that herself. She said if she were interested in someone, it would be someone who looked like me. Besides, she treats me more respectfully than the other servants. What’s the obvious conclusion from that?"
(aside) Here’s an overweening rogue!,(whispering) What an egomaniac!
"(aside) O, peace! Contemplation makes a rare turkey-cock of him. How he jets under his advanced plumes!","(whispering) Shh! When he’s alone with his thoughts, he’s even more like a haughty peacock. Watch him strut!"
"(aside) 'Slight, I could so beat the rogue!","(whispering) I swear, I’d like to beat the jerk so hard!"
"(aside) Peace, I say.",(whispering) Be quiet!
To be Count Malvolio!,"Just think, I could be Count Malvolio!"
"(aside) Ah, rogue!","(whispering) Ah, what a jerk!"
"(aside) Pistol him, pistol him.","(whispering) Shoot him, just shoot him."
"(aside) Peace, peace!","(whispering) Shh, shh!"
There is example for ’t. The lady of the Strachy married the yeoman of the wardrobe.,"After all, it wouldn’t be the first time that kind of thing has happened. Lady Strachy married her wardrobe manager."
"(aside) Fie on him, Jezebel!","(whispering) Damn him, the arrogant fool!"
"(aside) O, peace! Now he’s deeply in. Look how imagination blows him.",(whispering) Shh! We’ve got him right where we want him. He’s on a big ego trip.
"Having been three months married to her, sitting in my state—","Just think of me, having been married to her for three months, sitting around majestically—"
"(aside) Oh, for a stone-bow, to hit him in the eye!",(whispering) If only I had a slingshot so I could hit him in the eye!
"Calling my officers about me, in my branched velvet gown, having come from a daybed, where I have left Olivia sleeping—","Calling my servants together, wearing an embroidered robe, having just come from a couch where I’ve left Olivia sleeping—"
(aside) Fire and brimstone!,(whispering) That does it!
"(aside) O, peace, peace!","(whispering) Oh, be quiet, be quiet!"
"And then to have the humor of state, and after a demure travel of regard, telling them I know my place as I would they should do theirs, to ask for my kinsman Toby—","Then I’d put on a lofty and exalted expression. I’d look around the room calmly, then tell them that I know my place, and I’d like them to know theirs. Then I’d tell them to go find my cousin Toby—"
(aside) Bolts and shackles!,(whispering) That really does it!
"(aside) O peace, peace, peace! Now, now.","(whispering) Oh, quiet, quiet! Please, please."
"Seven of my people, with an obedient start, make out for him. I frown the while, and perchance wind up watch, or play with my—some rich jewel. Toby approaches, curtsies there to me—","I’d send seven of my servants to go get him. While I waited, I’d frown impatiently, and perhaps wind my watch, or play with my—with some expensive piece of jewelry I happen to be wearing. Toby would approach me. He’d bow to me—"
(aside) Shall this fellow live?,(whispering) Are we going to let this guy live?
"(aside) Though our silence be drawn from us with cars, yet peace.","(whispering) Yes, we have to be quiet, even if it’s torture."
"I extend my hand to him thus, quenching my familiar smile with an austere regard of control—","I reach out my hand to him like this, giving him a stern look instead of my usual friendly smile—"
(aside) And does not Toby take you a blow o' the lips then?,(whispering) And then doesn’t Toby punch you in the mouth?
"Saying, “Cousin Toby, my fortunes having cast me on your niece give me this prerogative of speech—”","And I’d say to him, “Cousin Toby, since I’ve been lucky enough to marry your niece, I have the right to say a few things to you—”"
"(aside) What, what?","(whispering) Oh yeah, like what?"
“You must amend your drunkenness.”,“You must stop being such a drunk.”
"(aside) Out, scab!","(whispering) Get out of here, you scab!"
"(aside) Nay, patience, or we break the sinews of our plot.","(whispering) No, be quiet, or we’ll screw up the joke."
"“Besides, you waste the treasure of your time with a foolish knight—”",“And you’re wasting your time with that foolish knight—”
"(aside) That’s me, I warrant you.","(whispering) That’s me, I bet."
“One Sir Andrew—”,“That Sir Andrew—”
"(aside) I knew ’twas I, for many do call me fool.",(whispering) I knew he was talking about me. A lot of people call me foolish.
(seeing the letter) What employment have we here?,(seeing the letter) What’s this?
(aside) Now is the woodcock near the gin.,(whispering) He’s taking the bait.
"(aside) O, peace! And the spirit of humors intimate reading aloud to him!","(whispering) Shhh! I hope he reads it out loud, to make it funnier!"
"(picking up the letter) By my life, this is my lady’s hand these be her very C’s, her U’s and her T’s and thus makes she her great P’s. It is, in contempt of question, her hand.","(picking up the letter) My goodness, this is my lady’s handwriting This is an obscene joke: Malvolio unwittingly spells out “cut,” Elizabethan slang for vagina, which is what she uses to make her “pees.” handwriting ! These are her C’s, her U’s and her T’s, and that’s how she makes her big P’s. It’s definitely her handwriting, no doubt about it."
"(aside) Her C’s, her U’s and her T’s. Why that?","(whispering) Her C’s, her U’s, and her T’s. Why focus on that?"
"(reads) “To the unknown beloved, this, and my good wishes”—Her very phrases! By your leave, wax. Soft! And the impressure her Lucrece, with which she uses to seal. 'Tis my lady. To whom should this be?","(reads) To my dear beloved who doesn’t know I love him, I send you this letter with all my heart”—That’s exactly how she talks! Excuse me, sealing wax. (he breaks the seal) Wait! This is the stamp my lady seals her letters with—it has a picture of Lucrece on it. This letter is from Olivia. Who is this written to?"
"(aside) This wins him, liver and all.",(whispering) This’ll get him.
"(reads) “Jove knows I love, But who? Lips, do not move;",(he reads) God knows I love someone. But who? I can’t let my lips say his name; “No man must know.”
"“No man must know.” What follows? The numbers altered. “No man must know.” If this should be thee, Malvolio?","“No man must know.” What comes after that? Look, the meter changes in her poem. “No man must know.” What if this someone were you, Malvolio?"
"(aside) Marry, hang thee, brock!","(whispering) Go hang yourself, you stinking badger!"
"“I may command where I adore, But silence, like a Lucrece knife, With bloodless stroke my heart doth gore; M.O.A.I. doth sway my life.”","(reading) “I may order the one I love. But silence, like a knife, cuts open my heart With strokes that draw no blood. M.O.A.I. rules my life.”"
(aside) A fustian riddle!,(whispering) What a pretentious riddle!
"(aside) Excellent wench, say I.",(whispering) That Maria has outdone herself!
"“M.O.A.I. doth sway my life.” Nay, but first, let me see, let me see, let me see.","“M.O.A.I. rules my life.” Hmm, let me see, let me see, let me see."
(aside) What dish o' poison has she dressed him!,(whispering) What a dish of poison she’s mixed for him!
(aside) And with what wing the staniel checks at it!,(whispering) And look how willingly he’s taking the bait.
"“I may command where I adore.” Why, she may command me. I serve her, she is my lady. Why, this is evident to any formal capacity. There is no obstruction in this. And the end—what should that alphabetical position portend? If I could make that resemble something in me—Softly! M.O.A.I.—","“I may command the one I love.” Well, she commands me. I’m her servant. She’s my boss. Why, anyone can see what this means. There’s no ambiguity here. But the end, what do those letters mean? If only I could somehow relate them to me! Hmm. M.O.A.I.—"
"(aside) O, ay, make up that.—He is now at a cold scent.","(whispering) Oh, bad dog.—He’s losing the scent!"
"(aside) Sowter will cry upon ’t for all this, though it be as rank as a fox.","(whispering) He’ll find it again, no matter how much it stinks."
"“M”—Malvolio. “M”—why, that begins my name.","“M”—Malvolio. “M”—why, that’s the first letter in my name."
(aside) Did not I say he would work it out? The cur is excellent at faults.,(whispering) Didn’t I tell you he’d figure it out? This dog’s excellent at following false leads.
“M.” But then there is no consonancy in the sequel that suffers under probation “A” should follow but “O” does.,"“M.” But then the next letter isn’t the same. “A” should be next, but instead “O” comes next."
"(aside) And “O” shall end, I hope.","(whispering) And an “O” like a noose will end this, I hope."
"(aside) Ay, or I’ll cudgel him and make him cry “O!”","(whispering)Yeah, or I’ll beat him up and make him yell “Oh!”"
And then “I” comes behind.,And then the “I” comes next.
"(aside) Ay, an you had any eye behind you, you might see more detraction at your heels than fortunes before you.","(whispering) If you had an I in the back of your head, you’d see trouble behind you."
"“M.O.A.I.” This simulation is not as the former, and yet to crush this a little, it would bow to me, for every one of these letters are in my name. Soft, here follows prose.","M.O.A.I. This code’s not as easy to crack as the other one. But if I shake it up a little it’ll work, because every one of those letters is in my name. But wait, there’s some prose after her poem."
"(reads) “If this fall into thy hand, revolve. In my stars I am above thee, but be not afraid of greatness. Some are born great, some achieve greatness, and some have greatness thrust upon 'em. Thy Fates open their hands. Let thy blood and spirit embrace them. And, to inure thyself to what thou art like to be, cast thy humble slough and appear fresh. Be opposite with a kinsman, surly with servants.","(he reads) “If this letter falls into your hands, think carefully about what it says. By my birth I rank above you, but don’t be afraid of my greatness. Some are born great, some achieve greatness, and some have greatness thrust upon them. Your fate awaits you. Accept it in body and spirit. To get used to the life you’ll most likely be leading soon, get rid of your low-class trappings. Show some eagerness for the new upscale lifestyle that’s waiting"
"Let thy tongue tang arguments of state. Put thyself into the trick of singularity. She thus advises thee that sighs for thee. Remember who commended thy yellow stockings and wished to see thee ever cross-gartered. I say, remember. Go to, thou art made, if thou desir’st to be so; if not, let me see thee a steward still, the fellow of servants, and not worthy to touch Fortune’s fingers. Farewell. She that would alter services with thee, The Fortunate Unhappy”","for you. Argue with a relative like a nobleman, and be rude to servants. Talk about politics and affairs of state, and act free and independent. The woman who advises you to do this loves you. Remember the woman who complimented you on your yellow stockings, and said she always wanted to see you with crisscrossing laces going up your legs—remember her. Go ahead. A happy new life is there if you want it. If you don’t want it, just keep acting like a lowly servant who’s not brave enough to grab the happiness there before him. Goodbye. Signed, she who would be your servant, The Fortunate Unhappy.”"
"Daylight and champaign discovers not more. This is open. I will be proud, I will read politic authors, I will baffle Sir Toby, I will wash off gross acquaintance, I will be point- devise the very man. I do not now fool myself, to let imagination jade me, for every reason excites to this, that my lady loves me. She did commend my yellow stockings of late, she did praise my leg being cross-gartered, and in this she manifests herself to my love, and with a kind of injunction, drives me to these habits of her liking. I thank my stars I am happy. I will be strange, stout, in yellow stockings, and cross-gartered, even with the swiftness of putting on. Jove and my stars be praised! Here is yet a postscript.","This is as clear as sunlight in an open field. I’ll do it. I’ll be vain and proud, I’ll read up on politics, I’ll insult Sir Toby, I’ll get rid of my lower-class friends, and I’ll be the perfect man for her. I know I’m not fooling myself, or letting myself get carried away by my imagination, because every clue points to the fact that Lady Olivia loves me. She did compliment me on my yellow stockings recently, and she said she liked how the crisscross laces looked on my legs. That’s her way of saying she loves me. Oh, I thank my lucky stars, I’m so happy. For her I’ll be strange and condescending, and I’ll put on my yellow stockings and crisscross laces right away. Thank God and my horoscope! Here’s a postscript!."
"(reads) “Thou canst not choose but know who I am. If thou entertainest my love, let it appear in thy smiling. Thy smiles become thee well. Therefore in my presence still smile, dear my sweet, I prithee.”","(reads) “You must have figured out who I am. If you love me, let me know by smiling at me. You’re so attractive when you smile. Please smile whenever you’re near me, my dearest darling.”"
"Jove, I thank thee! I will smile. I will do everything that thou wilt have me.","Dear God, thank you! I’ll do everything she wants me to do."
I will not give my part of this sport for a pension of thousands to be paid from the Sophy.,"I wouldn’t have missed this even for a pension of thousands of pounds, to be paid by the shah of Persia."
I could marry this wench for this device.,I could marry that Maria for thinking this up.
So could I too.,So could I.
And ask no other dowry with her but such another jest.,And I wouldn’t ask for any dowry except for her to play another trick like this one.
Nor I neither.,Neither would I.
Here comes my noble gull-catcher.,"Here she comes, the brilliant fool-catcher."
Wilt thou set thy foot o' my neck?,May I kiss your feet?
Or o' mine either?,And I too?
"Shall I play my freedom at tray-trip, and become thy bondslave?",Shall I be your slave?
"I' faith, or I either?",Me too.
"Why, thou hast put him in such a dream that when the image of it leaves him he must run mad.",You’ve made him so delusional he’ll go crazy when he learns the truth.
"Nay, but say true, does it work upon him?",Did it really work?
Like aqua vitae with a midwife.,Like medicine for a sick man.
"If you will then see the fruits of the sport, mark his first approach before my lady. He will come to her in yellow stockings, and ’tis a color she abhors, and cross-gartered, a fashion she detests. And he will smile upon her, which will now be so unsuitable to her disposition, being addicted to a melancholy as she is, that it cannot but turn him into a notable contempt. If you will see it, follow me.","If you want to really have some fun, watch him next time he’s near Lady Olivia. He’ll show up in yellow stockings—she hates yellow—and with laces crisscrossing up his legs—she hates that style of dress—and he’ll smile, which will go completely against her mood, since she’s addicted to sadness now. She’ll definitely get upset with him. If you want to watch, follow me."
"To the gates of Tartar, thou most excellent devil of wit!","I’d follow you to the gates of Hell, you sneaky little devil!"
I’ll make one too.,I’ll come too.
"Save thee, friend, and thy music. Dost thou live by thy tabour?","God bless you, my friend, and your music too. Do you make your living by playing that drum?"
"No, sir, I live by the church.","No, sir, I live by the church."
Art thou a churchman?,"Oh, you’re a clergyman?"
"No such matter, sir. I do live by the church; for I do live at my house, and my house doth stand by the church.","No, I live by the church because I live in a house, and my house is by the church."
"So thou mayst say the king lies by a beggar if a beggar dwell near him, or the church stands by thy tabor, if thy tabor stand by the church.","You could just as easily say that a king sleeps near a beggar if the beggar lives near him, or that the church is supported by your drum because it “stands by” your drum."
"You have said, sir. To see this age! A sentence is but a cheveril glove to a good wit. How quickly the wrong side may be turned outward!","You’re right, sir. What a wonderful time to be alive! Sentences can be turned inside out so easily nowadays!"
"Nay, that’s certain. They that dally nicely with words may quickly make them wanton.","That’s true. People who fool around with words too much can make words act like whores—changing all the time, and immoral too."
"I would therefore my sister had no name, sir.","That’s why I wish my sister didn’t have a name, sir."
"Why, man?","Why, man?"
"Why, sir, her name’s a word, and to dally with that word might make my sister wanton. But, indeed, words are very rascals since bonds disgraced them.","Well, her name’s a word, and if you fooled around with it you might make her into a whore. But, you know, words have been rascals ever since people started using written contracts rather than their word of honor."
"Thy reason, man?",Why do you say that?
"Troth, sir, I can yield you none without words, and words are grown so false, I am loath to prove reason with them.","Honestly, sir, I’d need to use words to explain why, and since words are so unreliable and false, I’d rather avoid using them in a serious discussion."
I warrant thou art a merry fellow and carest for nothing.,I bet you’re a happy fellow who doesn’t care about anything.
"Not so, sir, I do care for something. But in my conscience, sir, I do not care for you. If that be to care for nothing, sir, I would it would make you invisible.","You’re wrong, sir, I do care about something. But I’ll admit I don’t care for you. If that means I don’t care about anything, you should disappear right now, since you’re nothing."
Art not thou the Lady Olivia’s fool?,Aren’t you Lady Olivia’s fool?
"No, indeed, sir; the Lady Olivia has no folly. She will keep no fool, sir, till she be married, and fools are as like husbands as pilchards are to herrings; the husband’s the bigger: I am indeed not her fool, but her corrupter of words.","No, sir. Lady Olivia doesn’t want to have anything to do with foolishness. So she won’t have a fool until she gets married. Fools are to husbands as anchovies are to sardines—husbands are the bigger ones. I’m not her fool. I just make words into whores for her."
I saw thee late at the Count Orsino’s.,I saw you at Count Orsino’s recently.
"Foolery, sir, does walk about the orb like the sun. It shines everywhere. I would be sorry, sir, but the fool should be as oft with your master as with my mistress: I think I saw your wisdom there.","I’m everywhere. Foolishness is all over the world, just like sunshine. I’d be sorry if people thought your master was less familiar with foolishness than my mistress is. I think I saw you there, you wise man."
"Nay, an thou pass upon me, I’ll no more with thee. Hold, there’s expenses for thee.","Oh no, if you’re joking around with me, I’m leaving. Wait, here’s a coin for you."
"Now Jove, in his next commodity of hair, send thee a beard!","Next time God sends out a shipment of hair, I hope he gives you a beard!"
"By my troth, I’ll tell thee, I am almost sick for one, (aside) though I would not have it grow on my chin. (to fool) Is thy lady within?","Oh, I know. Seriously, I’m dying for one, (to herself) I mean, I’m dying for a man who has a beard; I don’t want one to grow on my chin. (to the FOOL) Is Lady Olivia inside?"
"Would not a pair of these have bred, sir?","If I had two of these coins, do you think they’d breed more coins?"
"Yes, being kept together and put to use.","Yes, if you kept them together and invested them."
Cressida to this Troilus.,"I’d like to be like that famous pimp, Lord Pandarus, and get a Cressida for my Troilus A “Cressida for my Troilus” means “a female coin for my male coin.” Troilus and Cressida were famous lovers, brought together by Cressida’s uncle Pandarus, traditionally regarded as the first pimp. Cressida for my Troilus ."
"(giving him money) I understand you, sir. 'Tis well begged.","(giving the FOOL money) I get what you’re driving at, sir. You’re a very clever beggar."
"The matter, I hope, is not great, sir, begging but a beggar. Cressida was a beggar. My lady is within, sir. I will construe to them whence you come. Who you are and what you would are out of my welkin, I might say “element,” but the word is overworn.","It shouldn’t be too much to ask; I’m only begging for a beggar. They say Cressida became a beggar in her old age. My lady Olivia’s inside, sir. I’ll tell them where you come from, though I don’t know who you are or what you want. I’d say I was “out of my element,” but that phrase is overused, so I’ll say I’m “out of my air.”"
"This fellow is wise enough to play the fool, And to do that well craves a kind of wit. The quality of persons, and the time, And, like the haggard, check at every feather That comes before his eye. This is a practise As full of labor as a wise man’s art, But wise men, folly-fall'n, quite taint their wit.","This guy’s wise enough to play the fool, and only clever people can do that. He pays attention to the mood and social rank of the person he’s joking with, and also to the time of day. And he doesn’t let go of his target when a distraction appears. His job requires as much effort and skill as any wise man’s occupation could. And he shows he’s very smart at playing the fool, while smart people look stupid when they play the fool."
"Save you, gentleman.","Hello, sir."
"And you, sir.","Hello to you too, sir."
"Dieu vous garde, monsieur.","(speaking in French) May God protect you, sir."
Et vous aussi. Votre serviteur!,"(speaking in French) And you too, sir. I’m at your service."
"I hope, sir, you are, and I am yours.","( stammering Sir Andrew’s awkwardness reveals that he’s bad at French. stammering ) Oh, good, I am too."
"Will you encounter the house? My niece is desirous you should enter, if your trade be to her.","My niece would like you to come in to the house, if your business here has to do with her."
"I am bound to your niece, sir. I mean, she is the list of my voyage.","I’m headed for your niece, sir. She’s the reason I’m here."
"Taste your legs, sir. Put them to motion.","Taste your legs, sir. Please go inside."
"My legs do better understand me, sir, than I understand what you mean by bidding me taste my legs.","Taste my legs? My legs stand under me, but I don’t understand what “taste your legs” means."
"I mean, to go, sir, to enter.","I mean please go into the house, sir."
I will answer you with gait and entrance. But we are prevented.,I will. But now we don’t have to!
"Most excellent accomplished lady, the heavens rain odors on you!","Oh, beautiful and accomplished lady, may the heavens rain odors upon you!"
(aside) That youth’s a rare courtier. “Rain odors.” Well.,(to himself) That young man’s classy. “Rain odors.” That’s good.
"My matter hath no voice, lady, but to your own most pregnant and vouchsafed ear.","My message is not for anyone else to hear, my lady. It’s only for your willing and receptive ear."
"(aside) “Odors,” “pregnant,” and “vouchsafed.” I’ll get 'em all three all ready.","(to himself) “Odors,” “willing,” and “deserving.” I’ll have to remember those words so I can use them later myself."
"Let the garden door be shut, and leave me to my hearing.",Close the garden door and leave me alone to hear his message.
"Give me your hand, sir.","Give me your hand, sir."
"My duty, madam, and most humble service.","I give you my obedience and my humble service, madam."
What is your name?,What’s your name?
"Cesario is your servant’s name, fair princess.",Cesario is my name—your servant’s name—fair princess.
"My servant, sir! 'Twas never merry world You’re servant to the Count Orsino, youth.","My servant! The world’s gone downhill since fake humility started passing for compliments. You’re not my servant, young man. You’re Count Orsino’s servant."
"And he is yours, and his must needs be yours: Your servant’s servant is your servant, madam.","But he’s your servant, so everything that’s his must be yours too. Your servant’s servant is your servant, madam."
"For him, I think not on him. For his thoughts,","As for him, I never think about him. As for his thoughts, I wish he’d think about nothing at all rather than think about me all the time."
"Madam, I come to whet your gentle thoughts On his behalf.","Madam, I’ve come here to try to make you like him."
"O, by your leave, I pray you, I bade you never speak again of him. But, would you undertake another suit, Than music from the spheres.","Oh, please, I’m begging you, don’t mention him again. But if you want to tell me that someone else loves me, I’d enjoy hearing that more than I’d enjoy listening to angels sing."
Dear lady—,My dear lady—
"Give me leave, beseech you. I did send, After the last enchantment you did here, A ring in chase of you. So did I abuse Under your hard construction must I sit, To force that on you, in a shameful cunning Which you knew none of yours. What might you think?","Please let me say something, I’m begging you. After you cast your magic spell on me last time, I sent you a ring. I fear it was a mistake, since I tricked my servant, myself, and you too. You probably think poorly of me after I forced that ring on you with such outrageous trickery. What else could you possibly think of me?"
"Have you not set mine honor at the stake, That tyrannous heart can think? To one of your receiving Enough is shown. A cypress, not a bosom, Hides my heart. So, let me hear you speak.","Haven’t you totally dismissed my honor and integrity in your anger? For someone as intelligent as you the situation must be clear enough. I’m wearing my heart on my sleeve, and I can’t hide my feelings. So let me hear what you have to say."
I pity you.,I feel sorry for you.
That’s a degree to love.,That’s a step in the direction of love.
That very oft we pity enemies.,"No, not at all. It’s a perfectly ordinary experience for us to feel sorry for our enemies."
"Why then methinks ’tis time to smile again. O world, how apt the poor are to be proud! If one should be a prey, how much the better The clock upbraids me with the waste of time. Be not afraid, good youth, I will not have you. And yet when wit and youth is come to harvest, Your wife is like to reap a proper man.","Well, enough of my whining then. That’s that! I was getting carried away with fantasies I didn’t deserve to have. But I should consider myself lucky. It’s much better to be destroyed by a noble enemy than by a cruel and heartless one. (a clock strikes) Listen to that, the clock’s scolding me for wasting my time loving you. Don’t worry, young man, I won’t stalk you. And when you’re older and wiser and ready for marriage, your future wife will have a fine husband. There’s the way back home for you, due west."
"Then westward ho! Grace and good disposition attend your ladyship! You’ll nothing, madam, to my lord by me?",Then west is where I’m headed! I wish you all the best. You do
"Stay, I prithee, tell me what thou thinkest of me.","Stay, Please, tell me what you think of me."
That you do think you are not what you are.,I think you’re denying what you really are.
"If I think so, I think the same of you.","If that’s true, I think the same thing about you."
Then think you right: I am not what I am.,You’re right. I am not what I am.
I would you were as I would have you be!,I wish you were what I wanted you to be!
"Would it be better, madam, than I am? I wish it might, for now I am your fool.","Would it be better if I were that, instead of what I am? I wish I were something better, because right now I’m a big fool."
"In the contempt and anger of his lip! A murderous guilt shows not itself more soon Than love that would seem hid. Love’s night is noon. (to VIOLA) Cesario, by the roses of the spring, I love thee so, that, maugre all thy pride, Nor wit nor reason can my passion hide. Do not extort thy reasons from this clause, For that I woo, thou therefore hast no cause, Love sought is good, but given unsought better.","(to herself) Oh, how beautiful he is even when he’s angry and full of contempt! A murderer can hide his guilt longer than someone in love can hide her love. Love shines brightly and can’t be hidden. (to VIOLA) Cesario, I swear by the spring roses, by virginity, honor, truth, and everything, I swear I love you. I love you so much that I can’t hide my passion for you, as clever as I am. Don’t assume that because I’m pursuing you there’s no reason to pursue me. Put two and two together and realize that asking for love is good, but getting it without asking is much better."
"By innocence I swear, and by my youth I have one heart, one bosom, and one truth, And that no woman has, nor never none And so adieu, good madam. Nevermore Will I my master’s tears to you deplore.","And I swear by my youth and innocence that I’ve only got one heart and one love to give, and that I’ve never given them to a woman and never will. So goodbye, my lady. I won’t ever come to complain about my lord’s love for you again."
"Yet come again, for thou perhaps mayst move That heart, which now abhors, to like his love.","Then come again for another reason. You might still be able to make yourself fall in love with me, the person he loves, even though you hate me now."
"No, faith, I’ll not stay a jot longer.","No, I won’t stay a second longer."
"Thy reason, dear venom, give thy reason.","Why are you leaving, my angry friend?"
"You must needs yield your reason, Sir Andrew.","Yes, you have to tell us why, Sir Andrew."
"Marry, I saw your niece do more favors to the Count’s servingman than ever she bestowed upon me. I saw ’t i' the orchard.","Well, because I saw your niece Olivia treat the count’s messenger better than she’s ever treated me. I saw it in the orchard."
"Did she see thee the while, old boy? Tell me that.","Did she see you there the whole time, old boy? Tell me that."
As plain as I see you now.,"Yes, she saw me quite clearly."
This was a great argument of love in her toward you.,"Well, that proves she’s in love with you."
"'Slight, will you make an ass o' me?",Are you trying to make fun of me?
"I will prove it legitimate, sir, upon the oaths of judgment and reason.","No, I’ll prove it with airtight evidence and logical argument."
And they have been grand-jurymen since before Noah was a sailor.,And you can’t deny evidence and argument—They’ve been around since Noah’s ark.
"She did show favor to the youth in your sight only to exasperate you, to awake your dormouse valor, to put fire in your heart and brimstone in your liver. You should then have accosted her, and with some excellent jests, fire-new from the mint, you should have banged the youth into dumbness.","She flirted with the messenger boy to exasperate you, fire up your passions, and make you angry and jealous. You should have run up to her, unleashed a few excellent quips invented on the spot, and rendered the young man speechless."
"This was looked for at your hand, and this was balked. The double gilt of this opportunity you let time wash off, and you are now sailed into the north of my lady’s opinion, where you will hang like an icicle on a Dutchman’s beard, unless you do redeem it by some laudable attempt either of valor or policy.","That’s what she was expecting, and you let her down. You wasted a golden opportunity, and now my lady thinks badly of you. You can only raise her opinion of you with some impressive act of courage or complicated intrigue."
"An ’t be any way, it must be with valor, for policy I hate. I had as lief be a Brownist as a politician.","I’ll have to do something courageous then, because I hate intrigue. I’d rather be a heretic than a schemer with fancy plots."
"Why, then, build me thy fortunes upon the basis of valor. Challenge me the count’s youth to fight with him. Hurt him in eleven places. My niece shall take note of it, and assure thyself, there is no love-broker in the world can more prevail in man’s commendation with woman than report of valor.","Well then, improve your situation with a show of courage. Challenge the count’s young servant to a fight. Hurt him in eleven different places. My niece Olivia will notice, and let me tell you, no matchmaker in the world can get you a woman faster than a reputation for courage."
"There is no way but this, Sir Andrew.","It’s really the only way, Sir Andrew."
Will either of you bear me a challenge to him?,Will either of you give him the message that I’m challenging him to a duel?
"Go, write it in a martial hand. Be curst and brief. It is no matter how witty, so it be eloquent and full of invention. Taunt him with the license of ink. If thou “thou”-est him some thrice, it shall not be amiss; and as many lies as will lie in thy sheet of paper, although the sheet were big enough for the bed of Ware in England, set 'em down. Go, about it. Let there be gall enough in thy ink, though thou write with a goose-pen, no matter. About it.","Go ahead and write it down. Make your handwriting look like a soldier’s. Be pointed and brief. It doesn’t need to be witty as long as it’s eloquent and imaginative. Taunt him as much as you want, since you’re only doing it in writing. It’s fine if you refer to him as “thou” instead of “you.” “Thou” was an informal version of “you,” and thus insulting when used to an aristocrat. “you.” Write down as many lies as you can fit on a sheet of paper. Go ahead, get on with it. You may be using an ordinary pen, but you can fill it with poison ink. Now get busy."
Where shall I find you?,Where will I find you when I’ve finished it?
We’ll call thee at the cubiculo. Go.,We’ll come find you in the bedroom. Go on.
"This is a dear manikin to you, Sir Toby.","This precious little guy is putty in your hands, Sir Toby."
"I have been dear to him, lad, some two thousand strong, or so.","He must like me, since he’s let me spend two thousand of his ducats."
We shall have a rare letter from him: but you’ll not deliver ’t?,"His letter’s going to be hilarious. But you’re not going to deliver it, are you?"
"Never trust me, then. And by all means stir on the youth to an answer. I think oxen and wainropes cannot hale them together. For Andrew, if he were opened and you find so much blood in his liver as will clog the foot of a flea, I’ll eat the rest of the anatomy.","Never trust me again if I don’t. And by all means see if you can get the young man to answer it. I don’t think a team of oxen could get them close enough to fight. If you dissected Andrew and found enough red blood in his liver It was commonly believed that cowards had white livers with no blood in them. liver for a flea to eat, then I’d eat the rest of his corpse. He’s a coward."
"And his opposite, the youth, bears in his visage no great presage of cruelty.","And his opponent, the young messenger, doesn’t look like he’d be very aggressive in a fight."
Look where the youngest wren of nine comes.,Here comes my little bird.
"If you desire the spleen, and will laugh yourself into stitches, follow me. Yond gull Malvolio is turned heathen, a very renegado. For there is no Christian that means to be saved by believing rightly can ever believe such impossible passages of grossness. He’s in yellow stockings.","Listen, if you want a good laugh—and I mean a side-splitting one—then follow me. That gullible idiot Malvolio must have renounced Christianity, since no Christian could do such outrageous things as he’s doing. He’s wearing yellow stockings."
And cross-gartered?,With crisscrossed laces?
"Most villanously, like a pedant that keeps a school i' the church. I have dogged him, like his murderer. He does obey every point of the letter that I dropped to betray him. He does smile his face into more lines than is in the new map with the augmentation of the Indies. You have not seen such a thing as ’tis. I can hardly forbear hurling things at him. I know my lady will strike him. If she do, he’ll smile and take ’t for a great favor.","Oh, he looks like a pathetic Sunday school teacher. I’ve stalked him like a murderer, and he’s done everything the letter told him to. He smiles so much his face has more lines in it than a map of the East Indies. You’ve never seen anything like it. I can hardly keep myself from throwing things at him. I know that my lady’s going to end up hitting him. And when she does, he’ll imagine she’s flirting with him."
"Come, bring us, bring us where he is.","Come on, take us to him."
"I would not by my will have troubled you, But, since you make your pleasure of your pains, I will no further chide you.","I really didn’t want to inconvenience you. But since you seem to enjoy helping me, I won’t nag you to stop any more."
"I could not stay behind you. My desire, And not all love to see you, though so much As might have drawn one to a longer voyage, But jealousy what might befall your travel, Being skilless in these parts, which to a stranger, Rough and unhospitable. My willing love, The rather by these arguments of fear, Set forth in your pursuit.","I couldn’t stay behind after you left. I just felt a sharp desire to follow you. It wasn’t just that I wanted to see you, though I very much did want that. I was also worried about what might happen to you while you were traveling, since you’re not familiar with this area, and it’s rough and unwelcoming to a stranger with no guide. I followed you because I love you and I was worried about you."
"My kind Antonio, I can no other answer make but thanks, Are shuffled off with such uncurrent pay. But were my worth as is my conscience, firm, You should find better dealing. What’s to do? Shall we go see the relics of this town?","My friend Antonio, all I can say is thank you. I know words are cheap. If I had any money I’d back up my gratitude with cash. Anyway, what should we do? Should we go see the sights in the town?"
"Tomorrow, sir. Best first go see your lodging.","We can do that tomorrow, sir. First we should make sure you have somewhere to stay."
"I am not weary, and ’tis long to night: I pray you, let us satisfy our eyes With the memorials and the things of fame That do renown this city.","I’m not tired, and night is a long time away. Come on, let’s go see the sights."
"Would you’d pardon me; Once in a sea-fight 'gainst the Count his galleys I did some service, of such note indeed, That were I ta'en here it would scarce be answered.","I’m sorry, but I can’t. You see, it’s dangerous for me to walk in these streets. Once in a battle at sea I did a lot of damage to Count Orsino’s warships. If they arrested me here, it’d be the end of me."
Belike you slew great number of his people?,You probably killed a lot of his men?
"Albeit the quality of the time and quarrel Might well have given us bloody argument. It might have since been answered in repaying What we took from them, which, for traffic’s sake, For which, if I be lapsèd in this place, I shall pay dear.","No, I didn’t do anything as violent as that, though we would’ve been justified in shedding a little blood over the matter. The whole quarrel might have been resolved since then when we repaid what we stole from them—which most of our city did, for the sake of friendly trade relations. I was the only one who refused to give back what I stole. That’s why I’ll pay dearly if they find me here."
Do not then walk too open.,Then don’t make yourself too conspicuous.
"It doth not fit me. Hold, sir, here’s my purse. (giving him money) Is best to lodge. I will bespeak our diet, Whiles you beguile the time and feed your knowledge With viewing of the town. There shall you have me.","You’re right. Hang on a minute, here’s some money for you. (he gives SEBASTIAN money) The best place to stay around here is an inn called the Elephant, in the suburbs south of the city. I’ll arrange for our meals while you enjoy yourself and educate yourself by looking at the town. You’ll find me at the Elephant."
Why I your purse?,Why are you giving me your purse?
"You have desire to purchase, and your store, I think, is not for idle markets, sir.",Maybe you’ll see some little trinket you want to buy. I doubt you’ve got enough money for little purchases like that.
I’ll be your purse-bearer and leave you For an hour.,I’ll hold on to your money and leave you for an hour.
To the Elephant.,We’ll meet at the Elephant.
I do remember.,I remember.
I have sent after him. He says he’ll come. How shall I feast him? What bestow of him? For youth is bought more oft than begged or borrow’d. I speak too loud.— And suits well for a servant with my fortunes. Where is Malvolio?,"I’ve sent for him. He says he’ll come. What kind of food should I serve him? What presents should I give him? It’s easier to buy young people than to beg or borrow them. Oh, I’m talking too loud.—Where’s Malvolio? He’s very serious, which is right for someone in mourning like me. Where is Malvolio?"
"He’s coming, madam; but in very strange manner. He is sure possessed, madam.","He’s coming, madam; but he’s acting very strangely. He must be possessed by the devil."
"Why, what’s the matter? Does he rave?","Why, what’s the matter with him? Is he talking nonsense?"
"No, madam, he does nothing but smile. Your ladyship were best to have some guard about you if he come, for sure the man is tainted in ’s wits.","No, he just smiles. You should have a guard nearby if he comes in here, because he’s clearly disturbed."
Go call him hither.,Ask him in here.
"I am as mad as he,","I’m as crazy as he is, if sad craziness and happy craziness are equivalent."
"How now, Malvolio?","What’s going on, Malvolio?"
"Sweet lady, ho, ho.","Hello, sweet lady."
Smilest thou? I sent for thee upon a sad occasion.,You’re smiling? I sent for you about a sad occasion.
"Sad, lady! I could be sad. This does make some obstruction in the blood, this cross-gartering, but what of that? If it please the eye of one, it is with me as the very true sonnet is, “Please one, and please all.”","Sad, my lady! I could be sad if I wanted to be. These crisscrossing laces do cut off the circulation in my legs a bit, but who cares? As the sonnet says, “If you please one special person, you please everyone who matters.”"
"Why, how dost thou, man? What is the matter with thee?","Why, what’s going on? What’s the matter with you?"
"Not black in my mind, though yellow in my legs. It did come to his hands, and commands shall be executed. I think we do know the sweet Roman hand.","My legs may be yellow, but I don’t feel blue. It was addressed to him, and orders must be obeyed. I think we know whose fancy handwriting that was."
"Wilt thou go to bed, Malvolio?","Don’t you think you should go to bed, Malvolio?"
"To bed? “Ay, sweetheart, and I’ll come to thee.”","To bed! “Yes, sweetheart, I’ll come to you.”"
"God comfort thee! Why dost thou smile so, and kiss thy hand so oft?","For heaven’s sake, why are you smiling like that and kissing your hand so much?"
"How do you, Malvolio?","How are you feeling, Malvolio?"
"At your request! Yes, nightingales answer daws!",You’re asking me! Noble people don’t answer to peasants!
Why appear you with this ridiculous boldness before my lady?,Why are you acting so brazen toward my lady?
“Be not afraid of greatness.” 'Twas well writ.,“Don’t be afraid of greatness.” That was well written.
"What meanest thou by that, Malvolio?","What do you mean by that, Malvolio?"
“Some are born great—”,“Some are born great—”
Ha?,What?
“Some achieve greatness—”,“Some achieve greatness—”
What sayest thou?,What are you saying?
“And some have greatness thrust upon them.”,“And some have greatness thrust upon them.”
Heaven restore thee!,Heaven help you!
“Remember who commended thy yellow stockings—”,“Remember who liked your yellow stockings—”
Thy yellow stockings?,Your yellow stockings?
“And wished to see thee cross-gartered.”,“And wanted to see you with laces crisscrossed over your legs.”
Cross-gartered?,Crisscrossed?
"“Go to, thou art made, if thou desirest to be so—”",“Go ahead. A happy new life is there if you want it—”
Am I made?,Am I a new life?
"“If not, let me see thee a servant still.”","“If you don’t want it, just keep acting like a lowly servant.”"
"Why, this is very midsummer madness.",This is completely insane.
"Madam, the young gentleman of the Count Orsino’s is returned. I could hardly entreat him back. He attends your ladyship’s pleasure.","Madam, Count Orsino’s young messenger has returned. It was hard to get him to come back, but he’s here now, waiting for you."
I’ll come to him.,I’ll go to him.
"Good Maria, let this fellow be looked to. Where’s my cousin Toby? Let some of my people have a special care of him. I would not have him miscarry for the half of my dowry.","Maria, take care of this poor fellow here. Where’s my cousin Toby? Have some of my servants take care of Malvolio. I’d give half my dowry to keep anything bad from happening to him."
"Oh, ho! Do you come near me now? No worse man than Sir Toby to look to me. This concurs directly with the letter. She sends him on purpose that I may appear stubborn to him, for she incites me to that in the letter. “Cast thy humble slough,” says she. “Be opposite with a kinsman, surly with servants. Let thy tongue tang with arguments of state. Put thyself into the trick of singularity,” and consequently sets down the manner how: as, a sad face, a reverend carriage, a slow tongue, in the habit of some sir of note, and so forth. I have limed her, but it is Jove’s doing, and Jove make me thankful! And when she went away now, “Let this fellow be looked to.” “Fellow!” Not “Malvolio,” nor after my degree, but “fellow.” Why, everything adheres together, that no dram of a scruple, no scruple of a scruple, no obstacle, no incredulous or unsafe circumstance—what can be said? Nothing that can be can come between me and the full prospect of my hopes. Well, Jove, not I, is the doer of this, and he is to be thanked.","Oh ho! Look at me now! No less a person than Sir Toby, Lady Olivia’s own relative, is going to take care of me. This is just what the letter said. She’s sending him to me on purpose, so I can be rude to him just like she said in the letter. “Get rid of your low-class trapping,” she said. “Argue with a relative of mine like a nobleman, and be rude to servants. Talk about politics and affairs of state, and act free and independent.” And then she explains how to do it: I should have a serious face and dignified demeanor, well-modulated speech, acting like a distinguished gentleman and so on. I’ve got her now, but I’ve got God to thank for it! And when she left just now, she said “Take care of this poor fellow here.” Fellow!” Not “Malvolio,” not anything referring to my low station in life, but “fellow.” Everything’s going perfectly. Not the tiniest ounce, not the littlest insignificant amount of trouble or bad luck could ruin it—what can I say? Nothing can come between me and the fulfillment of all my hopes. Well, God is responsible for that, not me, and he deserves thanks."
"Which way is he, in the name of sanctity? If all the devils of hell be drawn in little, and Legion himself possessed him, yet I’ll speak to him.","Where is he, for God’s sake? I don’t care if all the devils in hell crammed together to possess him, I still want to speak to him."
"Here he is, here he is. How is’t with you, sir? How is’t with you, man?","Here he is, here he is. How are you, sir?"
"Go off, I discard you. Let me enjoy my private. Go off.",Go away. I don’t want to see your face. Let me enjoy my privacy. Go away.
"(to SIR TOBY BELCH) Lo, how hollow the fiend speaks within him! Did not I tell you? Sir Toby, my lady prays you to have a care of him.","(to SIR TOBY BELCH) Ooh, listen to the scary devil speaking from inside him! Didn’t I tell you? Sir Toby, Lady Olivia wants you to take care of him."
Aha! Does she so?,Ah-ha! Does she?
"(to FABIAN and MARIA) Go to, go to! Peace, peace. We must deal gently with him. Let me alone.—How do you, Malvolio? How is ’t with you? What, man, defy the devil! Consider, he’s an enemy to mankind.","(to FABIAN and MARIA) Come on, come on! Calm down, calm down. We need to treat him gently. Let me take care of this.—How are you, Malvolio? How are things? Come on, man, just say no to the devil! Think about it, he’s the enemy of mankind."
Do you know what you say?,Do you even know what you’re talking about?
"(to SIR TOBY BELCH) La you, an you speak ill of the devil, how he takes it at heart! Pray God, he be not bewitched!","(to SIR TOBY BELCH) Look at that, he acts insulted if you say bad things about the devil! I hope to God he’s not bewitched!"
Carry his water to the wisewoman.,Get a urine sample and take it to a witch doctor to find out.
"Marry, and it shall be done tomorrow morning if I live. My lady would not lose him for more than I’ll say.","Sure thing, we’ll do it tomorrow morning. My lady would never want to lose him."
"How now, mistress?","What are you saying, mistress?"
O Lord!,"Oh, Lord!"
"(to MARIA) Prithee, hold thy peace. This is not the way. Do you not see you move him? Let me alone with him.","(to MARIA) Please, keep quiet. This is not the way to act. Don’t you see you’re upsetting him? Leave me alone with him."
"No way but gentleness, gently, gently. The fiend is rough and will not be roughly used.","Gentleness is the only way to go—gently, gently. The devil inside him is rough, but we can’t treat it roughly."
"(to MALVOLIO) Why, how now, my bawcock! How dost thou, chuck?","(to the imaginary devil inside MALVOLIO) So how are you, my pretty little bird? How are you doing in there, sweet little chicken?"
Sir!,Sir!
"Ay, Biddy, come with me.—What, man! 'Tis not for gravity to play at cherry-pit with Satan. Hang him, foul collier!","Yes, dear little chick, come along with me.—Shut up, man! You’re serious enough to know not to play games with Satan. Damn that dirty black coalminer of a devil!"
"Get him to say his prayers, good Sir Toby, get him to pray.","Get him to say his prayers, Sir Toby, get him to pray."
"My prayers, minx?","My prayers, you hussy?"
"(to SIR TOBY BELCH) No, I warrant you, he will not hear of godliness.","(to SIR TOBY BELCH) No, I’m telling you, he refuses to hear anything about religion."
"Go, hang yourselves all! You are idle, shallow things. I am not of your element. You shall know more hereafter.","Go hang yourselves, all of you! You’re all lazy and shallow. I’m not like you. I have a higher future waiting for me. You’ll know more about it later."
Is ’t possible?,Is it possible?
"If this were played upon a stage now, I could condemn it as an improbable fiction.","If this were a play, I’d complain it was unrealistic."
"His very genius hath taken the infection of the device, man.",He’s really taken this prank to heart. He’s playing the role perfectly.
"Nay, pursue him now, lest the device take air and taint.","No, follow him now, before he divulges the prank and ruins everything."
"Why, we shall make him mad indeed.","Wow, we’re really going to drive him crazy."
The house will be the quieter.,The house will be so much quieter.
"Come, we’ll have him in a dark room and bound. My niece is already in the belief that he’s mad. We may carry it thus, for our pleasure and his penance, till our very pastime, tired out of breath, prompt us to have mercy on him, at which time we will bring the device to the bar and crown thee for a finder of madmen. But see, but see!","Come on, let’s put him in a dark room and tie him up. My niece already thinks he’s insane. We can go on like this, punishing him and having some fun, until we’re tired of it. Then we can take mercy on him and let him out, and talk about how well the joke went. We’ll also worship you for setting up this trick. Let’s do it, let’s do it!"
More matter for a May morning.,Here’s more insanity for us.
"(presenting a paper) Here’s the challenge, read it. Warrant there’s vinegar and pepper in ’t.","(presenting them a piece of paper) Here’s the challenge, read it. It’s bursting with fighting words."
Is ’t so saucy?,Is it that aggressive?
"Ay, is ’t, I warrant him. Do but read.","Yes, it is, I think. Just read it."
"Give me. (reads) “Youth, whatsoever thou art, thou art but a scurvy fellow.”","Give it to me. (he reads) “Young man, whatever you are, you’re a real scum bucket.”"
"Good, and valiant.",Nice. Very courageous.
"(reads) “Wonder not, nor admire not in thy mind, why I do call thee so, for I will show thee no reason for ’t.”","(reading) “Don’t even ask why I call you that, because I won’t give you any explanation.”"
"A good note, that keeps you from the blow of the law.",That’s a good thing to put in—it keeps you from getting in trouble with the law.
"(reads) “Thou comest to the lady Olivia, and in my sight she uses thee kindly. But thou liest in thy throat. That is not the matter I challenge thee for.”","(reading) “You come to see the lady Olivia, and she’s kind to you. But you’re a complete liar. That’s not why I’m challenging you to a duel.”"
"Very brief, and to exceeding good sense—less.",Nice and short and full of good sense—or should I say nonsense?
"(reads) “I will waylay thee going home, where if it be thy chance to kill me—”","(reading) “I’ll ambush you on your way home, and if you’re lucky enough to kill me—”"
Good.,Good.
(reads) “Thou killest me like a rogue and a villain.”,"(reading) “You’ll be killing me like a common criminal, a mugger.”"
Still you keep o' the windy side of the law. Good.,You still haven’t said anything incriminating. Good.
"(reads) “Fare thee well, and God have mercy upon one of our souls. He may have mercy upon mine, but my hope is better, and so look to thyself. Thy friend, as thou usest him, and thy sworn enemy, Andrew Aguecheek”","(reading) “Good luck, and may God have mercy on one of our souls. He may have mercy upon mine. But I have a better chance of surviving, so watch out. Signed, your friend, if you treat him right, and your sworn enemy, Andrew Aguecheek”"
"If this letter move him not, his legs cannot. I’ll give ’t him.","If this letter doesn’t make him fight, I don’t know what will. I’ll give it to him."
You may have very fit occasion for ’t. He is now in some commerce with my lady and will by and by depart.,"You might have a great opportunity to give it to him right now. He’s conducting some business with my lady, and sooner or later he’ll leave."
"Go, Sir Andrew. Scout me for him at the corner the orchard like a bum-baily. So soon as ever thou seest him, draw, and as thou drawest, swear horrible, for it comes to pass oft that a terrible oath, with a swaggering accent sharply twanged off, gives manhood more approbation than ever proof itself would have earned him. Away!","Go, Sir Andrew. Look out for him in the corner of the orchard as if you were a sheriff’s deputy. As soon as you see him, draw your sword, and as you draw it, start swearing horribly. Sometimes a terrible swear word, like a well-shot arrow, makes you look more brave and manly than getting in a fight would. Now go!"
"Nay, let me alone for swearing.",Don’t worry about me not swearing enough.
"Now will not I deliver his letter, for the behavior of the young gentleman gives him out to be of good capacity and breeding. His employment between his lord and my niece confirms no less. Therefore this letter, being so excellently ignorant, will breed no terror in the youth. He will find it comes from a clodpole. But, sir, I will deliver his challenge by word of mouth, set upon Aguecheek a notable report of valor, and drive the gentleman (as I know his youth will aptly receive it) into a most hideous opinion of his rage, skill, fury, and impetuosity. This will so fright them both that they will kill one another by the look, like cockatrices.","I won’t deliver this letter. The young gentleman’s behavior shows that he’s sensible and has good manners. The fact that he serves as a go-between for his lord and my niece Olivia confirms this. So this letter, which is so incredibly stupid and ignorant, isn’t going to scare him at all. He’ll just think an idiot wrote it. But I’ll deliver Sir Andrew’s challenge by word of mouth, describing Sir Andrew as courageous in battle and convincing the young gentleman that Sir Andrew is furious, impetuous, and a skilled fighter (he’ll believe me because he’s young). This will make them both so afraid that they’ll kill each other just by looking at each other."
"Here he comes with your niece. Give them way till he take leave, and presently after him.","Here comes the messenger with your niece. Leave them alone until he sets off home, and then follow him."
I will meditate the while upon some horrid message for a challenge.,"Meanwhile, I’ll think of some horrible way to phrase the challenge."
"I have said too much unto a heart of stone And laid mine honor too unchary on ’t. There’s something in me that reproves my fault, That it but mocks reproof.","I’ve said too much to someone with a heart of stone. I’ve foolishly jeopardized my honor and reputation. I hate myself for behaving that way, but I just had to, and no criticism could have stopped me."
With the same 'havior that your passion bears Goes on my master’s grief.,My lord acts just as crazy with love as you do.
"Here, wear this jewel for me. 'Tis my picture. And I beseech you come again tomorrow. What shall you ask of me that I’ll deny, That honor, saved, may upon asking give?","Here, take this piece of jewelry. There’s a picture of me inside. Don’t refuse it. It won’t annoy you like me, because it doesn’t have a voice. And I beg you, please come here again tomorrow. What could you possibly ask of me that I wouldn’t give you, as long as it didn’t damage my honor and self-respect?"
Nothing but this: your true love for my master.,"Nothing, except your true love for my lord."
Which I have given to you?,How could I honorably give him what I’ve already given you?
I will acquit you.,I’ll give it back to you.
"Well, come again tomorrow. Fare thee well. A fiend like thee might bear my soul to hell.",Just come again tomorrow. Good-bye. A devil like you could lead me to hell.
"Gentleman, God save thee.","Hello, sir."
"And you, sir.",Hello to you.
"That defense thou hast, betake thee to ’t. Of what nature the wrongs are thou hast done him, I know not, but thy intercepter, full of despite, bloody as the hunter, attends thee at the orchard end. Dismount thy tuck, be yare in thy preparation, for thy assailant is quick, skillful and deadly.","You’d better think up a way to defend yourself. I don’t know what you’ve done to upset him, but someone has challenged you to a duel. He’s riled up and bloodthirsty, and he’s waiting for you at the back of the orchard. Draw your sword and get on your toes, because your assailant is quick, skillful, and deadly."
"You mistake, sir. I am sure no man hath any quarrel to me. My remembrance is very free and clear from any image of offense done to any man.","There must be some mistake, sir. I’m sure nobody would have any reason to fight with me. I can’t remember anything I’ve ever done to offend anyone."
"You’ll find it otherwise, I assure you. Therefore, if you hold your life at any price, betake you to your guard, for your opposite hath in him what youth, strength, skill, and wrath can furnish man withal.","You’re wrong about that, I assure you. So if you value your life at all, be on your guard. Your opponent has enough youth, strength, skill, and anger to outfight anyone."
"I pray you, sir, what is he?","But who is this person, sir?"
"He is knight, dubbed with unhatched rapier and on carpet consideration, but he is a devil in private brawl. Souls and bodies hath he divorced three, and his incensement at this moment is so implacable that satisfaction can be none but by pangs of death and sepulchre. Hob, nob, is his word. “Give ’t or take ’t.”","He’s a knight. He was made a knight because of his court connections, but when he’s fighting a civilian he’s a real monster. He’s killed three people, and he’s so furious right now that the only thing that will satisfy him is seeing you die. “Fight to the death” is his motto."
"I will return again into the house and desire some conduct of the lady. I am no fighter. I have heard of some kind of men that put quarrels purposely on others, to taste their valor. Belike this is a man of that quirk.","I’ll go back inside and ask the lady for some kind of escort. I’m not a fighter. I’ve heard of men who pick fights with other people on purpose, just to see how brave they are. This man is probably like that."
"Sir, no. His indignation derives itself out of a very competent injury. Therefore get you on and give him his desire. Back you shall not to the house, unless you undertake that with me which with as much safety you might answer him. Therefore on, or strip your sword stark naked, for meddle you must, that’s certain, or forswear to wear iron about you.","No, sir. He’s furious because you insulted him, and he has a right to satisfaction. So go out there and give him what he wants. You can’t go back into the house unless you want to fight with me—and if you’re willing to do that, you might as well just go and fight with him. So go to the orchard, or take out your sword right now. You’re going to have to fight one way or another, there’s no doubt about that, or else you’ll have to stop wearing a sword and claiming to be a gentleman."
"This is as uncivil as strange. I beseech you, do me this courteous office, as to know of the knight what my offense to him is. It is something of my negligence, nothing of my purpose.","This is as rude as it is strange. Please, do me this one favor: find out what I’ve done to offend this knight. It must be something I did accidentally."
"I will do so. Signior Fabian, stay you by this gentleman till my return.","I will do so. Mr. Fabian, stay with this gentleman until I come back."
"Pray you, sir, do you know of this matter?","Excuse me, sir, do you know anything about this?"
"I know the knight is incensed against you, even to a mortal arbitrament, but nothing of the circumstance more.","I know the knight is furious with you, so much that he’s willing to fight you to the death, but I don’t know anything else about it."
"I beseech you, what manner of man is he?",What kind of man is he?
"Nothing of that wonderful promise, to read him by his form, as you are like to find him in the proof of his valor. He is, indeed, sir, the most skillful, bloody, and fatal opposite that you could possibly have found in any part of Illyria. Will you walk towards him? I will make your peace with him if I can.","He’s not much to look at, but he’s very brave in battle. He really is the most skillful, bloodthirsty, and dangerous opponent you can find in Illyria. Do you want to go see him? I’ll try to calm him down for you if I can."
I shall be much bound to you for ’t. I am one that had rather go with sir priest than sir knight. I care not who knows so much of my mettle.,"I’d be very grateful to you if you did. I’m much more of a religious type than a fighter, and I don’t care who knows it."
"Why, man, he’s a very devil. I have not seen such a firago. I had a pass with him, rapier, scabbard, and all, and he gives me the stuck-in with such a mortal motion, that it is inevitable. And on the answer, he pays you as surely as your feet hit the ground they step on. They say he has been fencer to the Sophy.","Wow, he’s a real devil. I’ve never seen such a monster. I had a round with him, and his sword thrust is so deadly that you can’t even duck out of the way. And when he strikes back at you, he’ll hit you as sure as you’re standing there. They say he used to fence for the shah of Persia."
Pox on ’t! I’ll not meddle with him.,That’s it! I won’t mess with him.
"Ay, but he will not now be pacified. Fabian can scarce hold him yonder.","Yes, but now there’s no way to calm him down. Fabian can hardly control him over there."
"Plague on ’t, an I thought he had been valiant and so cunning in fence, I’d have seen him damned ere I’d have challenged him. Let him let the matter slip, and I’ll give him my horse, gray Capilet.","Darn it, if I’d guessed he was so brave and such a good swordsman, I never would have challenged him. I’ll give him my gray horse Capilet if he forgets the whole thing."
"I’ll make the motion. Stand here, make a good show on ’t. I’ll ride your horse as well as I ride you.",I’ll give it a try. Stay right here and try to look good. This may end without anyone getting killed. (to himself) I’ll ride your horse just like I ride you.
(to FABIAN) I have his horse to take up the quarrel. I have persuaded him the youth’s a devil.,(to FABIAN) He’s given me his horse to try to avoid the fight—I’ve persuaded him that the young man is a fighting machine.
"He is as horribly conceited of him, and pants and looks pale, as if a bear were at his heels.","He’s just as terrified of Sir Andrew. He’s pale and hyperventilating, as if a bear were chasing him."
"(to VIOLA) There’s no remedy, sir; he will fight with you for ’s oath sake. Marry, he hath better bethought him of his quarrel, and he finds that now scarce to be worth talking of. Therefore, draw for the supportance of his vow. He protests he will not hurt you.","(to VIOLA) There’s nothing you can do about it, sir. He insists on fighting with you because he swore he would. But he’s thought over his reason for challenging you to fight, and he realizes it’s so insignificant that it’s not worth thinking about. So draw your sword so he can carry out his vow. He promises not to hurt you."
(aside) Pray God defend me! A little thing would make me tell them how much I lack of a man.,(to herself) God help me! If anything happens I’m going to have to tell them exactly how unmanly I am.
"Give ground, if you see him furious.",Back off if he seems really furious.
"Come, Sir Andrew, there’s no remedy. The gentleman will, for his honor’s sake, have one bout with you. He cannot by the duello avoid it. But he has promised me, as he is a gentleman and a soldier, he will not hurt you. Come on, to ’t.","Come on, Sir Andrew, there’s nothing you can do about it. The gentleman insists on fighting a round with you, for the sake of his honor. The rules of dueling say he has to. But as a gentleman and a soldier he’s promised me he won’t hurt you. Come on, get ready."
"Pray God, he keep his oath!",I hope to God he keeps his promise!
"I do assure you, ’tis against my will.","I swear to you, I don’t want to be doing this."
"Put up your sword. If this young gentleman Have done offence, I take the fault on me. If you offend him, I for him defy you.","Put your sword away. If this young gentleman has offended you, I’ll take the blame for it. If you’ve offended him, I’ll fight you."
"You, sir? Why, what are you?","You, sir? Who are you?"
Than you have heard him brag to you he will.,"I’m just a good friend of his. In fact, I’d do even more to him than what you’ve heard him promise to do."
"Nay, if you be an undertaker, I am for you.","If you’re someone who gets into fights, I’ll fight with you."
"O good Sir Toby, hold! Here come the officers.","Oh, Sir Toby, stop! The police are here."
(to ANTONIO) I’ll be with you anon.,(to ANTONIO) I’ll be back for you soon.
"(to ANDREW) Pray, sir, put your sword up, if you please.","(to ANDREW) Please, sir, put away your sword. Please."
"Marry, will I, sir. And for that I promised you, I’ll be as good as my word. He will bear you easily and reins well.","I certainly will, sir. And as for what I promised to you, I’m as good as my word. You can ride him easily, and he responds well when you pull the reins."
This is the man. Do thy office.,This is the man. Do your job.
"Antonio, I arrest thee at the suit of Count Orsino.","Antonio, you’re under arrest on the orders of Count Orsino."
"You do mistake me, sir.","You must be mistaking me for someone else, sir."
"No, sir, no jot. I know your favor well, Though now you have no sea-cap on your head.— Take him away. He knows I know him well.","No, sir, not at all. I recognize your face perfectly, even without a sailor’s cap on your head.—Take him away. He knows I recognize him."
I must obey. (to VIOLA) This comes with seeking you:,"I have to obey. (to VIOLA) This has happened because I came looking for you, but there’s nothing I can do about it now. I’ll take what’s coming to me. But what’ll you do now that I have to ask you for my purse back?"
"What will you do, now my necessity Makes me to ask you for my purse? It grieves me Much more for what I cannot do for you Than what befalls myself. You stand amazed,",I’m more upset about not being able to help you than I am about what’s going to happen to me. You look so confused. Don’t worry about me.
"Come, sir, away.","Come on, sir, let’s go."
(to VIOLA) I must entreat of you some of that money.,"(to VIOLA) Really, I must ask you for some of that money."
"What money, sir? For the fair kindness you have showed me here, And part being prompted by your present trouble, I’ll lend you something. My having is not much. I’ll make division of my present with you. Hold, there’s half my coffer. (offering him money)","What money, sir? I feel sorry for you in this situation, and I want to thank you for the kindness you’ve shown me here, so I’ll lend you some of my money, though I don’t have much. I’ll give you half of everything I have right now. Take this. It’s half of all my money. (she offers him money)"
Will you deny me now? Is ’t possible that my deserts to you Lest that it make me so unsound a man As to upbraid you with those kindnesses That I have done for you.,"Are you really going to pretend you don’t know me now? After everything I’ve done for you, you’re refusing to help me? Don’t make me more miserable than I am. I might do something really weak and unmanly, like listing the kind things I’ve done for you."
"I know of none, Nor know I you by voice or any feature. Than lying, vainness, babbling, drunkenness, Or any taint of vice whose strong corruption Inhabits our frail blood—","I don’t know any kind things you’ve done for me, and I don’t recognize your voice or your face. I hate an ungrateful man more than I hate lying, vanity, babbling, drunkenness, or any other vice that we feeble human beings are susceptible to.—"
O heavens themselves!,"Oh, my God!"
"Come, sir, I pray you, go.","Come on, sir, please. Let’s go."
"I snatched one half out of the jaws of death, Relieved him with such sanctity of love, And to his image, which methought did promise Most venerable worth, did I devotion.","No, I’ve got something to say. I saved this young man’s life when he was half-dead, and nursed him back to health lovingly and tenderly. I devoted myself to him, since he looked noble and good."
What’s that to us? The time goes by. Away!,Why should we care? Time’s passing. Let’s go!
"But oh, how vile an idol proves this god! Thou hast, Sebastian, done good feature shame. In nature there’s no blemish but the mind. None can be called deformed but the unkind. Are empty trunks o'erflourished by the devil.","But oh, what a deceiver he turned out to be! You don’t live up to your good looks, Sebastian. You look good but you’re bad on the inside, where it counts, since the only real flaws in nature are in a person’s mind and soul. Only really cruel people can be called deformed. Virtue is beauty, but someone beautiful and wicked is like an empty box decorated by the devil."
"The man grows mad. Away with him. Come, come, sir.","The man’s going crazy. Take him away. Come on, sir. Come on."
Lead me on.,Take me.
"Methinks his words do from such passion fly, Prove true, imagination, oh, prove true, That I, dear brother, be now ta'en for you!","He was so angry I feel he must really believe what he was saying. I don’t believe it. Yet I wish I could. Oh, please be true, please let it be that this man has mistaken me for you, my dear brother!"
"Come hither, knight. Come hither, Fabian. We’ll whisper o'er a couplet or two of most sage saws.","Come here, Sir Andrew. You too, Fabian. We’ve got some words of wisdom to mull over."
"Yet living in my glass. Even such and so In favor was my brother, and he went","He called me Sebastian. I know my brother’s still alive in a sense, since I see him whenever I look in the mirror. My brother looked like me, and he dressed the same way that I’m dressed now—in the same colors,"
"Still in this fashion, color, ornament, For him I imitate. Oh, if it prove,","with the same accessories. Oh, if it turns out to be true that he survived, then that storm was kind, and the ocean was full of love!"
"A very dishonest paltry boy, and more a coward than a hare. His dishonesty appears in leaving his friend here in necessity and denying him. And for his cowardship, ask Fabian.","He’s a very dishonest, puny boy, and more cowardly than a rabbit. He abandoned his friend here in an emergency, and even pretended he didn’t know him. That shows he’s dishonest. As for his cowardliness, ask Fabian."
"A coward, a most devout coward, religious in it.","He’s a coward, a total coward. He’s religiously devoted to his cowardice."
"'Slid, I’ll after him again and beat him.","By God, I’ll go after him again and beat him up."
"Do, cuff him soundly, but never draw thy sword.","Please do. Beat him up well, but don’t draw your sword."
An I do not—,I swear I will—
"Come, let’s see the event.","Come on, let’s go see what happens."
I dare lay any money ’twill be nothing yet.,"I’ll bet anything you like that nothing will happen, once again."
Will you make me believe that I am not sent for you?,Are you trying to tell me that I wasn’t sent to get you?
"Go to, go to, thou art a foolish fellow. Let me be clear of thee.","Oh, who cares, you’re acting like a fool. Leave me alone."
"Well held out, i' faith. No, I do not know you, nor I am not sent to you by my lady, to bid you come speak with her, nor your name is not Master Cesario, nor this is not my nose neither. Nothing that is so is so.","Good for you, holding out on me like this! No, I don’t know you, and my lady didn’t send me to get you, and I’m not supposed to tell you to come speak with her, and your name is not Master Cesario, and this is not my nose, either. Nothing is what it is."
"I prithee, vent thy folly somewhere else. Thou know’st not me.","Oh please, go somewhere else to blab your nonsense. You don’t know me."
"Vent my folly? He has heard that word of some great man and now applies it to a fool. Vent my folly! I am afraid this great lubber, the world, will prove a cockney. I prithee now, ungird thy strangeness and tell me what I shall vent to my lady. Shall I vent to her that thou art coming?",Blab my nonsense? He must’ve heard that phrase describing some great man and now he’s using it on a jester. Blab my nonsense! What an idiotic place this world is. Now please stop being so strange and tell me what exactly I should blab to my lady. Should I blab to her that you’re coming?
"I prithee, foolish Greek, depart from me. There’s money for thee. (giving money) If you tarry longer, I shall give worse payment.","Please, fool, go away. Here’s money for you. (giving him money) If you stay any longer, I’ll give you something worse."
"By my troth, thou hast an open hand. These wise men that give fools money get themselves a good report—after fourteen years' purchase.","Well, well. You’re a generous man. Wise men who give fools money might get a good reputation—if they keep up regular payments for fourteen years."
"(to SEBASTIAN) Now, sir, have I met you again? There’s for you.","Well, sir, we meet again? Take that."
"(returning the blow) Why, there’s for thee, and there, and there. Are all the people mad?","(returning the blow) Well, then, take that, and that, and that. Is everyone here insane?"
"Hold, sir, or I’ll throw your dagger o'er the house.",Stop right now or I’ll throw your dagger over the roof.
(aside) This will I tell my lady straight. I would not be in some of your coats for two pence.,(to himself) I’m going to tell my lady about this right away. I wouldn’t be in any of your shoes if you paid me.
"(seizing SEBASTIAN) Come on, sir, hold!","(grabbing SEBASTIAN) Come on, sir, stop!"
"Nay, let him alone. I’ll go another way to work with him. I’ll have an action of battery against him if there be any law in Illyria. Though I struck him first, yet it’s no matter for that.","No, leave him alone. I’ll get back at him another way. I’ll sue him for assault and battery, if there’s any justice in Illyria. It doesn’t matter that I hit him first."
(to SIR TOBY BELCH) Let go thy hand.,(to SIR TOBY BELCH) Let me go.
"Come, sir, I will not let you go. Come, my young soldier, put up your iron. You are well fleshed. Come on.","No, sir, I won’t let you go. Come on, put your sword away, my little soldier. You’re awfully eager to fight. Come on."
I will be free from thee.,I’ll get free of you.
"What wouldst thou now? If thou darest tempt me further, draw thy sword.","What are you going to do now? If you insist on trying my patience any further, then take out your sword right now."
"What, what? Nay, then I must have an ounce or two of this malapert blood from you.",What? No. Because then I’d have to shed an ounce or two of your impudent blood.
"Hold, Toby! On thy life I charge thee, hold!","Stop, Sir Toby! I order you to stop!"
Madam!,Madam!
"Will it be ever thus? Ungracious wretch, Fit for the mountains and the barbarous caves, Where manners ne'er were preach’d! Out of my sight!— Rudesby, be gone!","Are you always going to be like this? You’re an ungrateful slob who’s only fit to live in the mountains, in caves far from civilized people where you won’t ever need good manners! Get out of my sight!—Dear Cesario, please don’t be offended.—Get out of here, you barbarian!"
"I prithee, gentle friend, Let thy fair wisdom, not thy passion, sway In this uncivil and unjust extent Against thy peace. Go with me to my house, This ruffian hath botched up, that thou thereby Mayst smile at this. Thou shalt not choose but go. Do not deny. Beshrew his soul for me! He started one poor heart of mine in thee.","Oh, my dear friend, please don’t get too upset by these rude people who bothered you. Come with me to my house. I’ll tell you about all the pointless, clumsy pranks this thug uncle of mine has come up with, so that you can laugh at this one. You have to come with me. Please don’t say no. Damn that Toby! He made my heart leap for you."
"Or I am mad, or else this is a dream. Let fancy still my sense in Lethe steep.",(to himself) What does this mean? Where is this all going? Either I’m insane or this is a dream. I hope these
"If it be thus to dream, still let me sleep!","delusions continue. If this is a dream, let me keep on sleeping!"
"Nay, come, I prithee. Would thou’dst be ruled by me!","Come with me, please. I wish you’d do what I ask!"
"Madam, I will.","Madam, I will."
"Oh, say so, and so be!","Oh, say it, and mean it!"
"Nay, I prithee, put on this gown and this beard. Make him believe thou art Sir Topas the curate. Do it quickly. I’ll call Sir Toby the whilst.","No, I’m telling you, put on this robe and beard. Make him think you’re Sir Topas the priest. Be quick. Meanwhile, I’ll get Sir Toby."
"Well, I’ll put it on, and I will dissemble myself in ’t, and I would I were the first that ever dissembled in such a gown.","Well, I’ll put it on and disguise myself. I wish I were the first person who ever told lies in a priest’s robe."
"I am not tall enough to become the function well, nor lean enough to be thought a good student, but to be said an honest man and a good housekeeper goes as fairly as to say a careful man and a great scholar. The competitors enter.","I’m not tall enough to make a believable priest, or skinny enough to look like a good student. But if you’re an honest man and a good host, that’s almost as good as being moral and studious. Here come the conspirators."
"Jove bless thee, master Parson.","God bless you, Mr. Priest."
"Bonos dies, Sir Toby. For, as the old hermit of Prague, that never saw pen and ink, very wittily said to a niece of King Gorboduc, “That that is is.” So I, being Master Parson, am Master Parson. For, what is “that” but “that,” and “is” but “is”?","Bonos dies The fool is saying hello in an imitation of Latin. Bonos dies , Sir Toby. As the old hermit of Prague, who couldn’t read or write, said very wittily to a niece of King Gorboduc, “Whatever is, is.” So since I’m Mr. Priest, I’m Mr. Priest. Because isn’t “that” “that,” and isn’t “is” “is”?"
"To him, Sir Topas.","Go to him, Sir Topas."
"(disguising his voice) What ho, I say! Peace in this prison!",(disguising his voice) Quiet down in this prison!
The knave counterfeits well. A good knave.,The fool’s a good actor. A good fool.
(from within) Who calls there?,(offstage) Who’s shouting?
"Sir Topas the curate, who comes to visit Malvolio the lunatic.",I’m Sir Topas the priest. I’ve come to visit Malvolio the lunatic.
"Sir Topas, Sir Topas, good Sir Topas, go to my lady—","Sir Topas, Sir Topas, good Sir Topas, please go find my lady Olivia—"
"Out, hyperbolical fiend! How vexest thou this man! Talkest thou nothing but of ladies?","Get out, demon! Why are you bothering this poor man! Can’t you talk about anything besides ladies?"
"(aside) Well said, Master Parson.","(to himself) Well said, Mr. Priest."
"Sir Topas, never was man thus wronged. Good Sir Topas, do not think I am mad. They have laid me here in hideous darkness.","Sir Topas, nobody’s ever been as badly treated as I’ve been. Good Sir Topas, don’t believe I’m insane, They’ve shut me up here in horrible darkness."
"Fie, thou dishonest Satan! I call thee by the most modest terms, for I am one of those gentle ones that will use the devil himself with courtesy. Sayest thou that house is dark?","You should be ashamed of yourself, Satan, you liar! I’m being gentle with you, because I’m one of those good-hearted people who are polite to the devil himself. You call this house dark?"
"As hell, Sir Topas.","Dark as hell, Sir Topas."
"Why, it hath bay windows transparent as barricadoes, and the clerestories toward the south-north are as lustrous as ebony. And yet complainest thou of obstruction?","But it has bay windows that are as transparent as stone walls, and the upper windows facing south-north are as clear as coal. But you’re still complaining of darkness and a bad view?"
"I am not mad, Sir Topas. I say to you this house is dark.","I’m not insane, Sir Topas. I’m telling you, this house is dark."
"Madman, thou errest. I say, there is no darkness but ignorance, in which thou art more puzzled than the Egyptians in their fog.","You’re wrong, you madman. There’s no darkness except ignorance, and you’re more ignorant than the Egyptians during the plague of fog."
"I say, this house is as dark as ignorance, though ignorance were as dark as hell. And I say, there was never man thus abused. I am no more mad than you are. Make the trial of it in any constant question.","I tell you, this house is as dark as ignorance. And I tell you, no man has ever been treated worse than me. I’m no more insane than you are, and I’ll prove it. Ask me any commonsense question."
What is the opinion of Pythagoras concerning wildfowl?,What was the philosopher Pythagoras’s belief about wild birds?
That the soul of our grandam might haply inhabit a bird.,That our grandmother’s soul could end up inhabiting a bird.
What thinkest thou of his opinion?,What do you think of his belief?
"I think nobly of the soul, and no way approve his opinion.","I respect the soul very much, so I disagree with his belief."
"Fare thee well. Remain thou still in darkness. Thou shalt hold the opinion of Pythagoras ere I will allow of thy wits, and fear to kill a woodcock lest thou dispossess the soul of thy grandam. Fare thee well.","Well then, goodbye. Stay in the dark. I’ll only admit that you’re sane when you agree with Pythagoras and hesitate to kill a bird because it might contain your grandmother’s soul. Goodbye."
"Sir Topas, Sir Topas!","Sir Topas, Sir Topas!"
My most exquisite Sir Topas!,The brilliant Sir Topas!
"Nay, I am for all waters.",I can do anything!
He sees thee not.,You could’ve done this without your beard and gown. He couldn’t see you.
"To him in thine own voice, and bring me word how thou findest him. I would we were well rid of this knavery. If he may be conveniently delivered, I would he were, for I am now so far in offense with my niece that I cannot pursue with any safety this sport to the upshot. Come by and by to my chamber.","Now talk to him in your own voice, and tell me how he is. I wish this trick would be over. If we can find a convenient way to let him go, I want to do it. I’m in so much trouble with my niece that it wouldn’t be safe to let this prank go to its conclusion. Come to my room later on."
"(sings in his own voice) Hey, Robin, jolly Robin,","(he sings in his own voice) Hey, Robin, jolly Robin, Tell me how your lady is."
Fool!,Fool!
"(sings) My lady is unkind, perdy.","(singing) My lady’s mean, and that’s a fact."
Fool!,Fool!
"(sings) Alas, why is she so?","(singing) Oh, I’m sorry, why is she mean?"
"Fool, I say!","Fool, I say!"
"(sings) She loves another—Who calls, ha?",(singing) She loves someone else—Who’s shouting?
"Good fool, as ever thou wilt deserve well at my hand, help me to a candle, and pen, ink, and paper. As I am a gentleman, I will live to be thankful to thee for ’t.","Good fool, good jester, I’ll make it worth your while if you get me a candle, and a pen, ink and paper. You have my word as a gentleman that I’ll always be grateful to you."
Master Malvolio?,Master Malvolio?
"Ay, good fool.","Yes, good fool."
"Alas, sir, how fell you besides your five wits?","Poor man, how did you go insane?"
"Fool, there was never a man so notoriously abused: I am as well in my wits, Fool, as thou art.","Fool, no one has ever been as mistreated as I am. I’m completely sane, Fool. I’m as sane as you are."
"But as well? Then you are mad indeed, if you be no better in your wits than a fool.","As sane as me? Then you really are insane, if you’re no saner than a fool."
"They have here propertied me, keep me in darkness, send ministers to me—asses!—and do all they can to face me out of my wits.","They treat me like garbage here. They keep me in darkness, and send idiotic priests to talk to me—those asses!—and do everything they can to insist I’m insane."
"Advise you what you say. The minister is here. (in the voice of Sir Topas) Malvolio, Malvolio, thy wits the heavens restore! Endeavor thyself to sleep, and leave thy vain bibble-babble.","Be careful what you say—the priest is here. (in the voice of Sir Topas) Malvolio, Malvolio, may heaven make you sane again! Try to sleep, and stop your pointless babbling."
Sir Topas!,Sir Topas!
"(as Sir Topas) Maintain no words with him, good fellow. (in his own voice) Who, I, sir? Not I, sir. God b' wi' you, good Sir Topas. (as Sir Topas) Marry, amen. (in his own voice) I will, sir, I will.","(as Sir Topas) Don’t talk to him, my friend. (in his own voice) Who, me, sir? Not me, sir. God be with you, Sir Topas, goodbye. (as Sir Topas) Well then, amen. (in his own voice) Goodbye, sir."
"Fool, fool, fool, I say!","Fool, fool, hey, fool!"
"Alas, sir, be patient. What say you sir? I am shent for speaking to you.","Please, sir, be quiet. What do you want to say, sir? I’ve just been scolded for speaking to you."
"Good fool, help me to some light and some paper. I tell thee, I am as well in my wits as any man in Illyria.","Be a nice fool and help me find a candle and some paper. I tell you, I’m as sane as any man in Illyria."
"Well-a-day that you were, sir.","If only you were, sir."
"By this hand, I am. Good fool, some ink, paper, and light, and convey what I will set down to my lady. It shall advantage thee more than ever the bearing of letter did.","I swear I am. Get me some ink, paper, and a candle. I’ll write a letter and you’ll take it to my lady. You’ll get a bigger reward than you ever got delivering a letter before."
"I will help you to ’t. But tell me true, are you not mad indeed? Or do you but counterfeit?","I’ll help you. But tell me honestly, are you sure you’re not insane? Or are you just pretending?"
"Believe me, I am not. I tell thee true.","Believe me, I’m not. I’m telling the truth."
"Nay, I’ll ne'er believe a madman till I see his brains. I will fetch you light, and paper, and ink.",I’ll never believe a madman until I can see his brains. But I’ll get you a candle and paper and ink.
"Fool, I’ll requite it in the highest degree. I prithee, be gone.","Fool, I’ll repay you for this favor. Please, hurry."
"(sings) And anon, sir, I’ll be with you again, In a trice, Like to the old Vice, Who, with dagger of lath In his rage and his wrath, Cries “Aha,” to the devil, Like a mad lad, Adieu, goodman devil.”","(he sings) I’m going now, sir, but soon I’ll be with you again, To help you resist the devil, Like the sidekick in the old plays Who shakes a wooden dagger, Fumes in rage and wrath, And shouts “Whoa!” to the devil. He yells, “Trim your nails, old man. And goodbye, Satan, you peasant.”"
"This is the air, that is the glorious sun. This pearl she gave me, I do feel ’t and see ’t, And though ’tis wonder that enwraps me thus, Yet ’tis not madness. Where’s Antonio, then? Yet there he was, and there I found this credit, That he did range the town to seek me out. His counsel now might do me golden service. For though my soul disputes well with my sense Yet doth this accident and flood of fortune So far exceed all instance, all discourse, That I am ready to distrust mine eyes And wrangle with my reason that persuades me Or else the lady’s mad. Yet if ’twere so, She could not sway her house, command her followers, Take and give back affairs and their dispatch With such a smooth, discreet, and stable bearing That is deceivable. But here the lady comes.","This is the air, that’s the glorious sun. I can feel and see this pearl she gave me. I may be dazed and confused, but I’m not insane. Where’s Antonio, then? I didn’t find him at the Elephant. But he’d been there before me, and they told me he’d gone out looking for me. I could really use his advice right now. I feel sure this situation is due to some mistake, and I don’t think I’m crazy. But this sudden flood of good luck is so unbelievable that I’m ready to distrust my own eyes and my own rational mind when they tell me I’m not insane—maybe the lady’s insane. But if that were the case, she wouldn’t be able to run her house, command her servants, listen to reports, make decisions, and take care of business as smoothly as she does. There’s something going on that’s not what it seems. But here she comes."
"(to SEBASTIAN) Blame not this haste of mine. If you mean well, Now go with me and with this holy man And underneath that consecrated roof, Plight me the full assurance of your faith, That my most jealous and too doubtful soul May live at peace. He shall conceal it What time we will our celebration keep According to my birth. What do you say?","(to SEBASTIAN) Don’t be angry with me for acting so quickly. If your intentions toward me are honorable, come with me and this holy man into the chapel over there, where you can soothe all my worries by making your marriage vows to me. The priest will keep it secret until you’re ready to make the news public and we can throw a full marriage celebration that befits my social standing. What do you say?"
"I’ll follow this good man, and go with you; And, having sworn truth, ever will be true.","I’ll follow the priest and go with you; and after I’ve sworn to be faithful, I’ll be faithful forever."
That they may fairly note this act of mine.,"Then lead the way, father. I want the skies bright and shining to show its approval of our wedding."
"Now, as thou lovest me, let me see his letter.","If you’re my friend, you’ll let me see his letter."
"Good Master Fabian, grant me another request.","Dear Mr. Fabian, do me another favor first."
Anything.,Anything.
Do not desire to see this letter.,Don’t ask to see this letter.
"This is, to give a dog and in recompense desire my dog again.","That’s like giving someone a dog as a present, and then asking for the dog back in return."
"Belong you to the Lady Olivia, friends?","My friends, are you all Lady Olivia’s servants?"
"Ay, sir, we are some of her trappings.","Yes, sir, we’re part of her entourage."
"I know thee well. How dost thou, my good fellow?","I know you. How are you, my friend?"
"Truly, sir, the better for my foes and the worse for my friends.","I’m better off because of my enemies, and worse off because of my friends."
Just the contrary. The better for thy friends.,You mean it the other way around. You’re better off because of your friends.
"No, sir, the worse.","No, sir, worse off."
How can that be?,How can that be?
"Marry, sir, they praise me and make an ass of me, now my foes tell me plainly I am an ass. So that by my foes, sir I profit in the knowledge of myself, and by my friends, I am abused. So that, conclusions to be as kisses, if your four negatives make your two affirmatives, why then the worse for my friends and the better for my foes.","Well, my friends praise me and make me look like an idiot, while my enemies tell me straightforwardly that I am an idiot. My enemies help me understand myself better, which is an advantage, and my friends help me lie about myself, which is a disadvantage. So if four negatives make two affirmatives, I’m worse off because of my friends and better off because of my foes."
"Why, this is excellent.",That’s excellent.
"By my troth, sir, no—though it please you to be one of my friends.",Don’t say that—unless you want to be one of my friends.
(giving a coin),(he gives him a coin) You won’t be worse off because of me: here’s some money.
"But that it would be double-dealing, sir, I would you could make it another.","That’s a nice hand you dealt me. But if it’s not double-dealing, sir, I wish you’d deal me another."
"O, you give me ill counsel.","Oh, you’re a naughty one, encouraging double-dealing."
"Put your grace in your pocket, sir, for this once, and let your flesh and blood obey it.","Ignore your virtue and nobility just this once, sir, go ahead."
"Well, I will be so much a sinner, to be a double-dealer. There’s another. (giving a coin)","Well, I’ll commit the sin of double-dealing, and deal you a second coin. Here it is. (he gives him another coin)"
"Primo, secundo, tertio is a good play, and the old saying is, the third pays for all. The triplex, sir, is a good tripping measure, or the bells of Saint Bennet, sir, may put you in mind—one, two, three.","And maybe a third? You know, there’s a game called “third time’s the charm,” which is fun to play, and they always say that three’s a magic number. The three-beat rhythm is a good for dancing, and the church bells chime—one, two, three."
"You can fool no more money out of me at this throw. If you will let your lady know I am here to speak with her, and bring her along with you, it may awake my bounty further.","You can’t get any more money out of me right now. If you tell your lady I’m here to speak with her, and bring her out with you when you come back, you might make me more generous."
"Marry, sir, lullaby to your bounty till I come again. I go, sir, but I would not have you to think that my desire of having is the sin of covetousness. But, as you say, sir, let your bounty take a nap, I will awake it anon.","Well then, sing a lullaby to your generosity: it’ll nap until I come back. But don’t think I’m doing this because I’m greedy. I’ll be back soon to wake up your generosity."
"Here comes the man, sir, that did rescue me.","Here comes the man who rescued me, sir."
"Yet, when I saw it last, it was besmeared As black as Vulcan in the smoke of war. A baubling vessel was he captain of, For shallow draught and bulk unprizable, With the most noble bottom of our fleet, That very envy and the tongue of loss Cried fame and honor on him.—What’s the matter?",I remember his face well. Though the last time I saw him it was black from the smoke of war. He was the captain of a flimsy boat that was practically worthless because it was so small. But with that tiny boat he fought such a fierce battle against the largest warship in our fleet that we had to admire his courage and skill even though he caused us a lot of damage.—What’s going on?
"Orsino, this is that Antonio And this is he that did the Tiger board When your young nephew Titus lost his leg. Here in the streets, desperate of shame and state, In private brabble did we apprehend him.","Orsino, this is the same Antonio who took the Phoenix and her cargo from Crete and captured our ship the Tiger during the battle where your young nephew Titus lost his leg. We arrested him here for fighting in the streets. It’s as if he didn’t care we were on the lookout for him here."
But in conclusion put strange speech upon me. I know not what ’twas but distraction.,He was kind to me and took my side in the fight. But then he said strange things to me. He might be insane. I don’t know what else it could be.
"Notable pirate! Thou saltwater thief, What foolish boldness brought thee to their mercies, Hast made thine enemies?",But you’re a famous pirate! A master thief of the seas! What made you stupid and careless enough to come visit the people you robbed and slaughtered?
"Orsino, noble sir, Be pleased that I shake off these names you give me. Antonio never yet was thief or pirate, Though, I confess, on base and ground enough, That most ingrateful boy there by your side From the rude sea’s enraged and foamy mouth Did I redeem. A wreck past hope he was. His life I gave him and did thereto add All his in dedication. For his sake Did I expose myself, pure for his love, Into the danger of this adverse town, Drew to defend him when he was beset, (Not meaning to partake with me in danger) Taught him to face me out of his acquaintance, And grew a twenty-years-removed thing While one would wink, denied me mine own purse, Not half an hour before.","Orsino, sir, please don’t call me those names. I was never a thief or a pirate, though I admit I was your enemy for good reasons. I came here because someone put a spell on me. I rescued that ungrateful boy next to you from drowning. He was a wreck, almost past hope. I saved his life and gave him my love, without reservation. I dedicated myself to him. For his sake I ran the risk of revisiting this unfriendly town, and I drew my sword to defend him when he was in trouble. But when the police caught us, he was clever and treacherous enough to pretend he’d never met me before. He acted like someone who barely knew me. He refused to give me my own wallet, which I had lent him only half an hour before."
How can this be?,How is that possible?
(to ANTONIO) When came he to this town?,(to ANTONIO) When did he come to town?
"Today, my lord, and for three months before, Both day and night did we keep company.","Today, my lord. And for three months before that, we spent every day and night together."
"Here comes the Countess. Now heaven walks on earth. But for thee, fellow. Fellow, thy words are madness: Three months this youth hath tended upon me;","Ah, the countess is coming! An angel is walking on earth. But as for you, mister, what you’re saying is insane. This young man has worked for me for three months; but more about that later. (to an officer) Take him away."
"What would my lord, but that he may not have, Wherein Olivia may seem serviceable? Cesario, you do not keep promise with me.","What can I give you that you want, my lord, except the one thing you can’t have? Cesario, you missed your appointment with me."
Madam?,Madam?
Gracious Olivia—,Dearest Olivia—
"What do you say, Cesario?—Good my lord—","What do you have to say for yourself, Cesario?—My lord, please—"
My lord would speak. My duty hushes me.,My lord wants to speak. It’s my duty to be quiet.
"If it be aught to the old tune, my lord, It is as fat and fulsome to mine ear","If what you have to say is anything like what you used to say, it’ll be as repulsive to my ears as wild screams after beautiful music."
Still so cruel?,Are you still so cruel?
"Still so constant, lord.","I am still so faithful, my lord."
"What, to perverseness? You, uncivil lady, To whose ingrate and unauspicious altars That e'er devotion tendered—what shall I do?","What, faithful to being mean and nasty? You’re not polite! I breathed from my soul the most faithful offerings to your ungrateful altars that any devoted person has ever offered—what more am I supposed to do?"
Even what it please my lord that shall become him.,You can do whatever you want as long as it’s socially appropriate.
"Why should I not, had I the heart to do it, Like to the Egyptian thief at point of death, That sometimes savors nobly. But hear me this: Since you to nonregardance cast my faith, And that I partly know the instrument That screws me from my true place in your favor, But this your minion, whom I know you love, And whom, by heaven I swear, I tender dearly, Him will I tear out of that cruel eye Where he sits crowned in his master’s spite. I’ll sacrifice the lamb that I do love To spite a raven’s heart within a dove.","Maybe I should act like the Egyptian thief who kills the woman he loves before he dies? That kind of savage jealousy sometimes seems noble. But listen to me. Since you keep denying the love I feel for you, and since I know who’s stealing my place in your heart, you can go on being cold-hearted, but I’m going to take this boy from you. He knows his master loves you. I’m doing this, even though he’s dear to me, because I know you love him. Come with me, boy. I’m ready to do something extreme. I’ll sacrifice this boy I care for, just to spite a beautiful woman with a heart of stone."
"And I, most jocund, apt, and willingly, To do you rest, a thousand deaths would die.","And I would die a thousand deaths cheerfully, if it made your life easier."
Where goes Cesario?,Where’s Cesario going?
"After him I love More than I love these eyes, more than my life, More, by all mores, than e'er I shall love wife. If I do feign, you witnesses above, Punish my life for tainting of my love!","Following the one I love more than my eyes or my life. More than I will ever love a wife. That’s the truth. The angels in heaven are my witnesses, and can see how pure my love is."
"Ay me, detested! How am I beguiled!","Ah, how awful, I feel so used! I’ve been tricked!"
Who does beguile you? Who does do you wrong?,Who tricked you? Who treated you badly?
Hast thou forgot thyself? Is it so long?— Call forth the holy father.,Have you completely forgotten? Has it been so long? Call the priest.
"(to VIOLA) Come, away!","(to VIOLA) Come on, let’s go!"
"Whither, my lord?—Cesario, husband, stay.","Go where, my lord?—Cesario, my husband, stay here."
Husband?,Husband?
"Ay, husband. Can he that deny?","Yes, husband. Can he deny it?"
"Her husband, sirrah?","Are you her husband, boy?"
"No, my lord, not I.","No, my lord, not me."
"Alas, it is the baseness of thy fear That makes thee strangle thy propriety. Be that thou know’st thou art, and then thou art As great as that thou fear’st.","You’re afraid, so you hide your identity. But don’t be afraid, Cesario. Accept the good luck that’s come your way. Be the person you know you are, and you’ll be as powerful as this person you fear."
"O, welcome, father! Father, I charge thee, by thy reverence, Here to unfold (though lately we intended Reveals before ’tis ripe) what thou dost know Hath newly passed between this youth and me.","Oh, hello, father! Father, could I please ask you to tell these people what happened between me and this young man? (I know we wanted to hide it, but now the situation demands that we reveal everything.)"
"A contract of eternal bond of love, Confirmed by mutual joinder of your hands, Strengthened by interchangement of your rings, And all the ceremony of this compact Sealed in my function, by my testimony, Since when, my watch hath told me, toward my grave","They were joined in an eternal bond of love and matrimony, and it was confirmed by a holy kiss and an exchange of rings. I witnessed it all as priest. It took place just two hours ago."
O thou dissembling cub! What wilt thou be When time hath sowed a grizzle on thy case? Or will not else thy craft so quickly grow That thine own trip shall be thine overthrow? Where thou and I henceforth may never meet.,"(to VIOLA) Oh, you little liar! How much worse will you be when you’re older? Maybe you’ll get so good at deceit that your tricks will destroy you. Goodbye, and take her. Just never set foot in any place where you and I might happen to meet."
"My lord, I do protest—","My lord, I swear to you—"
"O, do not swear! Hold little faith, though thou hast too much fear.","Oh, don’t swear! Keep a little bit of honesty, even if you’re afraid."
"For the love of God, a surgeon! Send one presently to Sir","For the love of God, call a doctor! Sir Toby needs help right away."
What’s the matter?,What’s the matter?
"He has broke my head across and has given Sir Toby a bloody coxcomb too. For the love of God, your help! I had rather than forty pound I were at home.","He cut my head and gave Sir Toby a bloody head, too. For the love of God, help us! I’d give forty pounds to be safe at home right now."
"Who has done this, Sir Andrew?","Who did this, Sir Andrew?"
"The Count’s gentleman, one Cesario. We took him for a coward, but he’s the very devil incardinate.","The count’s messenger, Cesario. We thought he was a coward, but he fights like a devil."
"My gentleman, Cesario?",My Cesario?
"'Od’s lifelings, here he is!—You broke my head for nothing, and that that I did, I was set on to do ’t by Sir Toby.","Oh, no, there he is! —You cut my head for no reason. Anything I did to you, I did it because Sir Toby made me."
"Why do you speak to me? I never hurt you. You drew your sword upon me without cause, But I bespoke you fair and hurt you not.","Why are you talking like this? I never hurt you. You waved your sword at me for no reason, but I was nice to you. I didn’t hurt you."
"If a bloody coxcomb be a hurt, you have hurt me. I think you set nothing by a bloody coxcomb.","If a bloody head counts as a hurt, then you hurt me. Apparently you think there’s nothing unusual about a bloody head."
"Here comes Sir Toby halting. You shall hear more. But if he had not been in drink, he would have tickled you othergates than he did.","Here comes Sir Toby, limping. He’ll tell you more of the story. If he hadn’t been drunk, he would’ve really roughed you up."
"How now, gentleman? How is ’t with you?","Hello, sir! How are you?"
"FOOL) Sot, didst see Dick Surgeon, sot?","It doesn’t matter how I am: he hurt me, and that’s that. (to FOOL) Fool, have you seen Dick the surgeon?"
"Oh, he’s drunk, Sir Toby, an hour agone. His eyes were set at eight i' the morning.","Oh, he’s drunk, Sir Toby, for a whole hour now. His eyes started glazing over around eight in the morning."
"Then he’s a rogue, and a passy-measures pavin. I hate a drunken rogue.",Then he’s no good. I hate no-good drunks.
Away with him! Who hath made this havoc with them?,Take him away! Who did this to him?
"I’ll help you, Sir Toby, because we’ll be dressed together.","I’ll help you, Sir Toby. They’ll treat our wounds together."
"Will you help?—An ass-head, and a coxcomb, and a knave, a thin-faced knave, a gull!","Will you help me?—What an ass and a fool, a gullible no-good idiot!"
"Get him to bed, and let his hurt be looked to.",Get him to bed and make sure his wounds are treated.
"I am sorry, madam, I have hurt your kinsman, But, had it been the brother of my blood, I must have done no less with wit and safety. You throw a strange regard upon me, and by that Pardon me, sweet one, even for the vows We made each other but so late ago.","I’m sorry, madam. I wounded your relative. But I would’ve been forced to do the same thing to my brother, since my safety was at stake. You’re looking at me strangely, so I guess you’re offended. But please forgive me, darling, for the sake of the vows we made to each other so recently."
"One face, one voice, one habit, and two persons! A natural perspective, that is and is not!","One face, one voice, one way of dressing, but two people! It’s like an optical illusion. It is and isn’t the same person!"
How have the hours racked and tortured me Since I have lost thee!,"Antonio, oh my dear Antonio! I’ve been so tortured since I lost track of you!"
Sebastian are you?,Are you Sebastian?
"Fear’st thou that, Antonio?","Do you have any doubts, Antonio?"
"An apple, cleft in two, is not more twin Than these two creatures. Which is Sebastian?",How did you divide yourself in two? These two people are as identical as two halves of an apple. Which one is Sebastian?
Most wonderful!,How unbelievable!
"(looking at VIOLA) Do I stand there? I never had a brother; Of here and everywhere. I had a sister, Whom the blind waves and surges have devoured. Of charity, what kin are you to me? What countryman? What name? What parentage?","(looking at VIOLA) Is that me standing over there? I never had a brother, and I’m certainly not a god who can be in two places at once. I had a sister who drowned. Please tell me, how am I related to you? Are you from my country? What’s your name? Who are your parents?"
"Such a Sebastian was my brother too, So went he suited to his watery tomb. If spirits can assume both form and suit You come to fright us.","I’m from Messaline. Sebastian was my father’s name, and my brother was named Sebastian too. He was dressed just like you are when he drowned. If ghosts can take on someone’s body and clothes, you must be a spirit who’s come to frighten us."
"A spirit I am indeed, Which from the womb I did participate. Were you a woman, as the rest goes even, I should my tears let fall upon your cheek And say “Thrice-welcome, drownèd Viola!”","I am a spirit, yes, since I have a soul. But my spirit has a body attached to it, one that I’ve carried since I was in the womb. If you were a woman, I’d hug you now and cry, and say “Welcome back, drowned Viola!”"
My father had a mole upon his brow.,My father had a mole on his forehead.
And so had mine.,Mine did too.
And died that day when Viola from her birth Had numbered thirteen years.,He died on Viola’s thirteenth birthday.
"Oh, that record is lively in my soul! That day that made my sister thirteen years.","Oh, I remember that very clearly! It’s true, he died on the day my sister turned thirteen."
"If nothing lets to make us happy both But this my masculine usurped attire, Do not embrace me till each circumstance That I am Viola. Which to confirm, I’ll bring you to a captain in this town, Where lie my maiden weeds, by whose gentle help I was preserved to serve this noble count. Hath been between this lady and this lord.","If the only thing keeping us from rejoicing is the fact that I’m wearing men’s clothes, then don’t hug me till I can prove beyond the shadow of a doubt that I’m Viola. I’ll take you to a sea captain here in town who’s got my women’s clothing in storage. He saved my life so I could serve this noble count. Everything that’s happened to me since then has involved my relationship with this lady and this lord."
"(to OLIVIA) So comes it, lady, you have been mistook. But nature to her bias drew in that. You would have been contracted to a maid; You are betrothed both to a maid and man.","(to OLIVIA) So you got it wrong, my lady. But nature fixed everything, turning your love for my sister into a love for me. If you hadn’t, you would’ve married a maiden. But that’s not completely wrong. I’m still a virgin, so in a sense I’m a maiden too."
"(to OLIVIA) Be not amazed. Right noble is his blood. If this be so, as yet the glass seems true, I shall have share in this most happy wreck. Thou never shouldst love woman like to me.","(to OLIVIA) Don’t be shocked. His blood is noble. If this is all as true as it seems to be, then I’m going to have a share in that lucky shipwreck. (to VIOLA) Boy, you told me a thousand times you’d never love a woman as much as you love me."
And all those sayings will I overswear; And those swearings keep as true in soul As doth that orbèd continent the fire,Everything I said before I’ll say again. I swear I meant every word.
"Give me thy hand, And let me see thee in thy woman’s weeds.",Give me your hand and let me see you dressed in woman’s clothing.
"The captain that did bring me first on shore Hath my maid’s garments. He, upon some action, Is now in durance at Malvolio’s suit,","The captain who brought me to shore has my women’s clothes. For some reason he’s in prison now on some legal technicality, on Malvolio’s orders. Malvolio is a gentleman in my lady’s entourage."
He shall enlarge him.,He’ll release him.
"Fetch Malvolio hither: And yet, alas, now I remember me, They say, poor gentleman, he’s much distract. From my remembrance clearly banished his. (to FOOL) How does he, sirrah?","Go and get Malvolio—But, oh no! Now I remember, they say the poor man is mentally ill. I was so crazy myself that I forgot all about him. (to the FOOL) How is Malvolio doing, do you know?"
"Truly, madam, he holds Beelzebub at the staves' end as well as a man in his case may do. Has here writ a letter to you. I should have given ’t you today morning, but as a madman’s epistles are no gospels, so it skills not much when they are delivered.","Well, he keeps the devil away as well as a man can in his situation. He’s written you a letter. I would’ve given it to you this morning, but a madman’s letters aren’t Gospel, so it doesn’t matter much if I’m a bit late."
"Open ’t, and read it.",Open it and read it.
"Look then to be well edified when the fool delivers the madman. (reads) “By the Lord, madam,”—","There’s a lot to learn when a fool recites the words of a madman. (he reads) “I swear to God, madam,”—"
How now? Art thou mad?,Why are you talking like that? Are you insane?
"No, madam, I do but read madness. An your ladyship will have it as it ought to be, you must allow vox.","No, madam, I’m just reading an insane letter. If you want things done in the right way, you’ll have to let me read a crazy letter in a crazy voice."
"Prithee, read i' thy right wits.","No, please, read it like a sane person."
"Therefore perpend, my princess, and give ear.","I will, my lady, but a sane person reading this would make it sound crazy. So listen up, princess."
"(giving the letter to FABIAN) Read it you, sirrah.","(giving the letter to FABIAN) Oh, you read it, sir."
"(reads) “By the Lord, madam, you wrong me, and the world shall know it. Though you have put me into darkness and given your drunken cousin rule over me, yet have I the benefit of my senses as well as your Ladyship. I have your own letter that induced me to the semblance I put on, with the which I doubt not but to do myself much right or you much shame. Think of me as you please. I leave my duty a little unthought of and speak out of my injury. The madly used Malvolio.”","(he reads) “I swear to God, madam, you’ve wronged me, and I’ll tell the whole world. You’ve shut me up in a dark room and given your drunken cousin authority over me, but I’m as sane as you are. I’ve got a letter from you encouraging me to act the way I did. If I didn’t have it, I couldn’t prove that I’m right and you’re wrong. I don’t care what you think of me. I’m going to forget my duties to you a little bit and complain about the injuries you’ve caused me. Signed, The poorly treated Malvolio.”"
Did he write this?,Did he write this?
"Ay, madam.","Yes, madam."
This savors not much of distraction.,It doesn’t sound like an insane person’s letter.
"See him delivered, Fabian; bring him hither.","Set him free. Fabian, bring him here."
"My lord so please you, these things further thought on, To think me as well a sister as a wife, One day shall crown the alliance on ’t, so please you,","My lord, I hope that after you think things over a bit you’ll come to like the idea of having me as a sister-in-law instead of a wife. We can have the weddings tomorrow if you want, here at my own house. I’ll pay for everything."
"Madam, I am most apt to embrace your offer. (to VIOLA) Your master quits you, and for your service done him, So much against the mettle of your sex, And since you called me “master” for so long, Here is my hand. You shall from this time be Your master’s mistress.","I accept that offer happily, madam. (to VIOLA) So you’re free now. I’m offering you my hand in marriage because of your loyal service to me, which was far from what any woman should be expected to do, especially a noble woman. You’ve called me “master” for so long. And now you’ll be your master’s mistress."
(to VIOLA)     A sister! You are she.,(to VIOLA) You’ll be my sister-in-law!
Is this the madman?,Is this the madman?
"Ay, my lord, this same. How now, Malvolio!","Yes, my lord. How are you, Malvolio?"
"Madam, you have done me wrong, Notorious wrong.","Madam, you’ve treated me badly, very badly."
"Have I, Malvolio? No.","I did, Malvolio? No."
"(handing a paper) Lady, you have. Pray you, peruse that letter. Write from it if you can, in hand or phrase; Or say ’tis not your seal, not your invention: You can say none of this. Well, grant it then And tell me, in the modesty of honor, Bade me come smiling and cross-gartered to you, To put on yellow stockings, and to frown Upon Sir Toby and the lighter people?","(he hands OLIVIA a paper) You did. Please have a look at this letter. You can’t deny that it’s your handwriting. Go ahead and try to write differently, and try to pretend that’s not your seal with your design on it. You can’t. So just admit it. And tell me honestly, why did you show me such fondness and asked me to smile at you, wear yellow stockings and crisscrossed laces for you, and be rude to Sir Toby and the servants?"
"And, acting this in an obedient hope, Kept in a dark house, visited by the priest, And made the most notorious geck and gull That e'er invention played on? Tell me why.",And then tell me why you imprisoned me in a dark house after I followed your instructions perfectly. You made me look like the biggest fool that anybody ever tricked. Tell me why you did it.
"Alas, Malvolio, this is not my writing, But out of question, ’tis Maria’s hand. And now I do bethink me, it was she First told me thou wast mad, then camest in smiling, And in such forms which here were presupposed This practice hath most shrewdly passed upon thee; But when we know the grounds and authors of it, Thou shalt be both the plaintiff and the judge Of thine own cause.","I’m sorry, Malvolio, but this isn’t my writing, though I admit it looks like mine. It’s definitely Maria’s handwriting. Now that I think about it, Maria was the one who first told me you were insane. That’s when you came in smiling at me, dressed up like the letter said, and acting just like it told you to act. Someone has played a very mean trick on you, but when we find out who’s responsible, you won’t just be the victim, but the judge who sentences the culprit. I promise."
"Good madam, hear me speak, Taint the condition of this present hour, Which I have wonder’d at. In hope it shall not, Most freely I confess, myself and Toby Set this device against Malvolio here, We had conceived against him. Maria writ The letter at Sir Toby’s great importance, In recompense whereof he hath married her. How with a sportful malice it was followed, If that the injuries be justly weighed That have on both sides passed.","Madam, let me say something. Please don’t let squabbles ruin this beautiful and miraculous moment. I confess that Toby and I were the ones who tricked Malvolio because we hated his strict and heavy-handed ways. Sir Toby had Maria wrote that letter, and he married her as a reward. We should just laugh about the whole thing rather than get upset about it, especially if we consider that each of the two parties offended the other equally."
"(to MALVOLIO) Alas, poor fool, how have they baffled thee!","(to MALVOLIO) Oh, poor fool, they’ve really humiliated you!"
"Why, “some are born great, some achieve greatness, and some have greatness thrown upon them.” I was one, sir, in this interlude, one Sir Topas, sir, but that’s all one. (imitates 							 MALVOLIO) “By the Lord, fool, I am not mad.”—But do you remember? “Madam, why laugh you at such a barren rascal; an you smile not, he’s gagged?” and thus the whirligig of time brings in his revenges.","Well, you know, “some are born great, some achieve greatness, and some have greatness thrust upon them.” Anyway, I was part of the trick, sir. I pretended to be a priest named Sir Topas. But what does it matter? (he imitates MALVOLIO) “I swear, fool, I’m not crazy.”—But do you remember what he said about me before? “I’m surprised you enjoy the company of this stupid troublemaker—unless he’s got somebody laughing at him, he can’t think of anything to say.” What goes around comes around."
I’ll be revenged on the whole pack of you.,I’ll get my revenge on every last one of you.
He hath been most notoriously abused.,He really was tricked horribly.
Pursue him and entreat him to a peace.,Go after him and try to calm him down a little.
"He hath not told us of the captain yet. A solemn combination shall be made Of our dear souls.—Meantime, sweet sister, We will not part from hence. Cesario, come, For so you shall be, while you are a man. Orsino’s mistress and his fancy’s queen.","He still hasn’t told us about the captain. When that’s been taken care of and the time is right, we’ll all get married. Until then, we’ll stay here, my dear sister-in-law. Cesario, come here. I’ll keep calling you Cesario while you’re still a man, but when we see you in women’s clothes you’ll be the queen of my dreams, Orsino’s true love."
"(sings) When that I was and a little tiny boy, With hey, ho, the wind and the rain, For the rain it raineth every day. But when I came to man’s estate, With hey, ho, the wind and the rain, 'Gainst knaves and thieves men shut their gate, But when I came, alas! to wive, With hey, ho, the wind and the rain, By swaggering could I never thrive, For the rain it raineth every day. With hey, ho, the wind and the rain, With toss-pots still had drunken heads, For the rain it raineth every day. A great while ago the world begun, But that’s all one, our play is done, And we’ll strive to please you every day.","(he sings) When I was a tiny little boy, With, hey, ho, the wind and the rain, A foolish thing didn’t matter much, Because the rain it rains every day. But when I became a man, With, hey, ho, the wind and the rain, People stopped talking to bad guys and thieves. Because the rain it rains every day. But when I got married, ah, too bad! With, hey, ho, the wind and the rain, It did me no good to boast and show off, Because the rain, it rains every day. But when I had to go to bed With, hey, ho, the wind and the rain, With idiots drunk out of their minds, Because the rain it rains every day. The world began a long time ago, With, hey, ho, the wind and the rain, But that doesn’t matter, our play is done, And we’ll try to please you every day."
