"Cease to persuade, my loving Proteus; Home-keeping youth have ever homely wits. Were ’t not affection chains thy tender days To the sweet glances of thy honored love, To see the wonders of the world abroad Than, living dully sluggardized at home, Wear out thy youth with shapeless idleness. But since thou lov’st, love still and thrive therein,","Stop trying to persuade me, Proteus. Young homebodies have dull minds. If you weren’t so tied to the girl you love, I’d ask you to come with me to see the distant wonders of the world rather than waste your youth living aimlessly as a sluggard at home. But, since you’re in love, love constantly and thrive in your love. I would do the same were I in love."
"Wilt thou be gone? Sweet Valentine, adieu! Think on thy Proteus when thou haply seest Some rare noteworthy object in thy travel. Wish me partaker in thy happiness If ever danger do environ thee, Commend thy grievance to my holy prayers, For I will be thy beadsman, Valentine.","Are you going now? Goodbye, Valentine, my dear friend! Think of me when you happen to see some rare and noteworthy object in your travels. Wish me happiness, too, when you have good fortune. And if you’re ever in danger, trust that my prayers will protect you, for I will pray for you, Valentine."
And on a love book pray for my success?,"And you’ll be praying for me on a book about love As opposed to the Bible. Valentine implies that Proteus makes love his religion. a book about love , I suspect?"
Upon some book I love I’ll pray for thee.,I’ll pray for you on a book I love.
"That’s on some shallow story of deep love, How young Leander crossed the Hellespont.","No doubt on some shallow story of “true” love, like the one about young Leander crossing the Hellespont In classical myth, Leander swam across the Hellespont each night to see his love, Hero. But he drowned in a storm during his crossing one night. Leander crossing the Hellespont ."
"That’s a deep story of a deeper love, For he was more than over shoes in love.",That’s a deep story of a deeper love—the love was so deep it covered his shoes.
And yet you never swam the Hellespont.,"It’s true. And your love is so deep it covers your boots, and yet you never swam across the Hellespont."
"Over the boots? Nay, give me not the boots.",Covers my boots? Don’t make fun of me.
"No, I will not, for it boots thee not.","No, I won’t, for it doesn’t profit you any."
What?,What?
"Coy looks with heartsore sighs, one fading moment’s mirth With twenty watchful, weary, tedious nights. If haply won, perhaps a hapless gain; If lost, why then a grievous labour won; Or else a wit by folly vanquishèd.","When you’re in love, your love-sick groans only earn her scorn, your brokenhearted sighs just get you flirtatious glances, and twenty tedious, sleepless nights spent pining for your sweetheart only yield you a brief moment of happiness. If by chance you succeed, it may turn out to be an unlucky win. And if you don’t, then you’ve only managed to waste your time. Either way, you win foolishness by being clever, or your cleverness is killed by foolishness."
"So, by your circumstance, you call me fool.","So, by your logic, I’m a fool."
"So, by your circumstance, I fear you’ll prove.","Because of your logic, I fear you’ll become a fool."
’Tis love you cavil at. I am not Love.,It’s love you have a problem with. But don’t blame me—I’m not Love.
"And he that is so yokèd by a fool Methinks, should not be chronicled for wise.","Love is your master, because he’s got the better of you. And in my opinion, anyone who’s been taken in by a fool shouldn’t be considered very wise himself."
"Yet writers say, as in the sweetest bud The eating canker dwells, so eating love","Yet writers say that just as the destructive caterpillar dwells within the sweetest flower buds, love inhabits the cleverest minds."
"And writers say, as the most forward bud Is eaten by the canker ere it blow, Even so by love the young and tender wit Is turned to folly, blasting in the bud, And all the fair effects of future hopes. But wherefore waste I time to counsel thee That art a votary to fond desire? Once more adieu! My father at the road","And writers also say that just as the caterpillar eats the greatest flower bud before it blooms, so too does love make young and fragile minds foolish. It destroys the young lover, who loses his youth while still in his prime, and takes away all his future hopes. But why am I wasting my time giving advice to you, a man who is devoted to foolish love? So, once again, farewell! My father expects to meet me at the harbor to see my ship off."
"And thither will I bring thee, Valentine.","I’ll go with you, Valentine."
"Sweet Proteus, no. Now let us take our leave. To Milan let me hear from thee by letters Of thy success in love, and what news else And I likewise will visit thee with mine.","My dear Proteus, no. We should say goodbye to each other now. Write to me in Milan, and tell me of your luck with love and whatever other news happens while I’m away. I’ll likewise write to you."
All happiness bechance to thee in Milan!,May you find happiness in Milan!
"As much to you at home! And so, farewell!",And the same to you here at home! Farewell!
"He after honor hunts, I after love. I leave myself, my friends, and all, for love. Thou, Julia, thou hast metamorphosed me, Made me neglect my studies, lose my time, War with good counsel, set the world at naught;","He hunts for honor, while I hunt for love. He leaves his friends to bring them more honor, but I neglect myself, my friends, and everything else for love. Oh, Julia, you’ve transformed me. You’ve made me neglect my studies, waste my time, argue against all reasonable advice, and set myself against the world. You’ve made my brain weak from thinking about you so much, and my heart sick with melancholy."
"Sir Proteus, save you! Saw you my master?","God save you, Sir Proteus! Have you seen my master?"
"But now he parted hence, to embark for Milan.",He just left here a minute ago on his way to Milan.
"Twenty to one, then, he is shipped already, And I have played the sheep in losing him.","I’d wager twenty to one, then, that his ship has already left. I’m foolish for having lost him."
An if the shepherd be a while away.,"Indeed, sheep often go astray when the shepherd has gone away."
"You conclude that my master is a shepherd, then, and I a sheep?","You’re saying that my master is a shepherd, then, and I’m a sheep?"
I do.,Yes.
"Why then, my horns are his horns, whether I wake or sleep.","Well then, my horns are his horns, whether I’m awake or asleep."
"A silly answer, and fitting well a sheep.",What a silly answer—very fitting for a sheep.
This proves me still a sheep.,This means you think I’m still a sheep.
True; and thy master a shepherd.,"Yes, and your master a shepherd."
"Nay, that I can deny by a circumstance.","No, I can disprove that with an example."
It shall go hard but I’ll prove it by another.,"It’ll be a challenge, but I’ll prove it with another example."
"The shepherd seeks the sheep, and not the sheep the shepherd; but I seek my master, and my master seeks not me. Therefore I am no sheep.","The shepherd looks for the sheep, but the sheep doesn’t look for the shepherd. I’m looking for my master, but my master isn’t looking for me. Therefore, I’m not a sheep."
The sheep for fodder follow the shepherd; the shepherd for food follows not the sheep. Thou for wages followest thy master; thy master for wages follows not thee. Therefore thou art a sheep.,"The sheep follows the shepherd because it wants food, but the shepherd doesn’t follow the sheep for food. You follow your master for your pay, but your master doesn’t follow you for pay. Therefore, you’re a sheep."
Such another proof will make me cry “Baa.”,"Another bad example like that and I’ll say, “Baa.”"
But dost thou hear? Gav’st thou my letter to Julia?,"But anyway, what happened? Did you give my letter to Julia?"
"Ay, sir. I, a lost mutton, gave your letter to her, a laced mutton, and she, a laced mutton, gave me, a lost mutton, nothing for my labor.","Yes, sir. I, a lost sheep, gave your letter to her, a prostitute The term “mutton” used in Shakespeare’s original was slang for “prostitute.” prostitute . And she, the prostitute, gave me, a lost sheep, nothing for all my hard work."
Here’s too small a pasture for such store of muttons.,The world isn’t big enough for all these darn sheep.
"If the ground be overcharged, you were best stick her.","If it’s too crowded for you, then you should stick her."
"Nay, in that you are astray: ’twere best pound you.","No, now you’ve really gone astray. I ought to pound you."
"Nay, sir, less than a pound shall serve me for carrying your letter.","No, sir, less than a pound will suffice for delivering your letter."
You mistake. I mean the pound—a pinfold.,"You misunderstood. I meant give you a pounding, pinhead."
’Tis threefold too little for carrying a letter to your lover.,"You’ve gone from a pound down to a pinhead? No, I want more than that—that’s far too little payment for delivering a letter to your lover."
But what said she?,So what did she say?
[Nodding] Ay.,(nodding) Ay.
"Nod-ay—why, that’s “noddy.”","Nod-ay? Well, that’s “naughty.”"
"You mistook, sir. I say she did nod, and you ask me if she did nod, and I say, “Ay.”","You misunderstood, sir. I said she nodded, and you asked me if she nodded, and I said, “Ay.”"
And that set together is “noddy.”,And all that put together is “naughty.”
"Now you have taken the pains to set it together, take it for your pains.","Now that you’ve taken the trouble to figure it out, take that for your trouble and consider it your answer."
"No, no, you shall have it for bearing the letter.","No, no, you shall have it for delivering the letter."
"Well, I perceive I must be fain to bear with you.","Well, I guess I must be willing to put up with you."
"Why, sir, how do you bear with me?","Why, sir, what do you mean, “put up with me”?"
"Marry, sir, the letter, very orderly, having nothing but the word “noddy” for my pains.","Geez, sir, I mean getting nothing but the word “naughty” as payment for my delivery."
"Beshrew me, but you have a quick wit.","Damn, you have a quick wit."
And yet it cannot overtake your slow purse.,And yet I can’t speed past your slowness in paying me.
"Come, come, open the matter in brief. What said she?","Come on, come on, tell me briefly. What did she say?"
"Open your purse, that the money and the matter may be both at once delivered.","Open your wallet, and the money and her response will both be delivered."
"[Giving him money] Well, sir, here is for your pains. What said she?","(giving him money) Well, sir, here’s something for your trouble. What did she say?"
"Truly, sir, I think you’ll hardly win her.","Honestly, sir, I think you’ll have a hard time winning her."
"Why, couldst thou perceive so much from her?",Why? Did you get that from speaking with her?
"Sir, I could perceive nothing at all from her, no, not so much as a ducat for delivering your letter. And being so hard to me that brought your mind, I fear she’ll prove as hard to you in telling your mind. Give her no token but stones, for she’s as hard as steel.","Sir, I couldn’t get anything at all out of her, not even so much as a tip for delivering your letter. And since she was so stingy to me for having delivered your thoughts, I fear she’ll prove just as stingy with you. Don’t give her any little gifts except stones, because she’s as hard as steel."
What said she? Nothing?,What did she say? Nothing?
"No, not so much as “Take this for thy pains.” To testify your bounty, I thank you, you have testerned me; in requital whereof, henceforth carry your letters yourself. And so, sir, I’ll commend you to my master.","No, not even so much as “Take this for your trouble.” I can attest to your generosity since you’ve given me a small tip. In return, you can deliver your own letters from now on. And so, sir, I’ll say hello to my master for you."
"Go, go, begone, to save your ship from wreck, Which cannot perish having thee aboard, Being destined to a drier death on shore.","Go on, get out of here. You’ll save your ship from sinking since you’re destined to die on dry land Refers to the saying “He that is born to be hanged shall never be drowned.” you’re destined to die on dry land ."
"I fear my Julia would not deign my lines, Receiving them from such a worthless post.",I must send a letter with a better messenger. I’m afraid my Julia wouldn’t accept my letter because she received it from such a worthless postman.
"But say, Lucetta, now we are alone, Wouldst thou then counsel me to fall in love?","Now that we’re alone, tell me, Lucetta, would you recommend that I fall in love?"
"Ay, madam, so you stumble not unheedfully.","Yes, madam, so you stumble into it on purpose."
Of all the fair resort of gentlemen In thy opinion which is worthiest love?,"Of all the attractive gentlemen that speak with me daily, which do you think would be best to love?"
"Please you repeat their names, I’ll show my mind According to my shallow simple skill.","Please tell me their names again, and I’ll tell you my opinion about them as best I can."
What think’st thou of the fair Sir Eglamour?,What do you think of the attractive Sir Eglamour?
"But, were I you, he never should be mine.","As a knight, he’s well spoken, elegant, and fine. But if I were you, I wouldn’t fall in love with him."
What think’st thou of the rich Mercatio?,"What do you think of Mercatio, who is rich?"
"Well of his wealth, but of himself, so-so.","I like his money a lot, but him only so-so."
What think’st thou of the gentle Proteus?,What do you think of kind Proteus?
"Lord, Lord, to see what folly reigns in us!","Good Lord, how foolish people are!"
How now? What means this passion at his name?,What’s that for? Why this outburst at his name?
"Pardon, dear madam, ’tis a passing shame That I, unworthy body as I am, Should censure thus on lovely gentlemen.","Pardon me, dear madam, it’s inexcusable that I, the unworthy servant that I am, should criticize such lovely gentlemen."
"Why not on Proteus, as of all the rest?",Why don’t you think well of Proteus out of all the rest?
"Then thus, of many good I think him best.","Fine then—of all the good men, I think Proteus is best."
Your reason?,What’s your reason?
I have no other but a woman’s reason; I think him so because I think him so.,I have no other reason than a woman’s intuition: I think he’s the best simply because I do.
And wouldst thou have me cast my love on him?,And would you have me throw my love at him?
"Ay, if you thought your love not cast away.","Yes, if you thought your love wouldn’t be thrown away."
"Why, he of all the rest hath never moved me.","But, of all the others, he has never proposed to me."
Yet he of all the rest I think best loves ye.,"Yet, of all the others, I think he loves you the most."
His little speaking shows his love but small.,The fact that he doesn’t say much to me shows he doesn’t love me much.
Fire that’s closest kept burns most of all.,Fire that’s most enclosed burns most of all.
They do not love that do not show their love.,Those who don’t show their love don’t love at all.
"O, they love least that let men know their love.","Oh, those who tell others of their love love the least of all."
I would I knew his mind.,I wish I knew how he felt.
"[Giving a letter] Peruse this paper, madam.","(giving her a letter) Read this paper, madam."
"“To Julia.” Say, from whom?","“To Julia.” Tell me, who’s it from?"
That the contents will show.,The letter will say.
"Say, say, who gave it thee?","Tell me, who gave it to you?"
"Sir Valentine’s page; and sent, I think, from Proteus. He would have given it you, but I, being in the way,","Sir Valentine’s servant, but I think it was sent from Proteus. He would have given it to you himself, but I ran into him first and took it in your name. Please forgive me."
"Now, by my modesty, a goodly broker! Dare you presume to harbor wanton lines? To whisper and conspire against my youth? Now trust me, ’tis an office of great worth, There, take the paper. See it be returned, Or else return no more into my sight. [Giving the letter back]","Well, you’re a fine go-between! Do you dare receive love letters, and to whisper and conspire against me because of my lack of experience? Trust me, it’s an important job, and you’re just the kind of person for it. There, take the letter. See that it’s returned, or else don’t let me see you again. (giving the letter back)"
To plead for love deserves more fee than hate.,A request for your love deserves more in return than your hatred.
Will ye be gone?,Will you get going?
That you may ruminate.,Just think about it.
"And yet I would I had o’erlooked the letter. It were a shame to call her back again And pray her to a fault for which I chid her. What fool is she, that knows I am a maid Since maids, in modesty, say no to that Which they would have the profferer construe ay. Fie, fie, how wayward is this foolish love That, like a testy babe, will scratch the nurse How churlishly I chid Lucetta hence, When willingly I would have had her here! How angerly I taught my brow to frown, When inward joy enforced my heart to smile! And ask remission for my folly past. What ho! Lucetta!","Then again, I wish I had read the letter. It would be embarrassing to call her back again and do the very thing I chided her for. How foolish she is, since she knows I’m a single girl but still wouldn’t make me read it! Out of modesty girls say “no” when they wish the giver would construe it as “yes.” How difficult this foolish thing called love is, like a cranky baby that will scratch its nurse and then immediately after show affection. How rudely I scolded Lucetta, when really I wanted her here. I’ve taught myself to appear angry even when my heart smiles with joy! My punishment is to call Lucetta back and ask forgiveness for my mistake. Hey, Lucetta!"
What would your ladyship?,"What would you like, my lady?"
Is ’t near dinner time?,Is it almost dinnertime?
That you might kill your stomach on your meat And not upon your maid.,"I wish it were, so that you could chew on your food instead of your servant."
What is ’t that you took up so gingerly?,What is that that you picked up so carefully?
Nothing.,Nothing.
"Why didst thou stoop, then?","Why did you bend over, then?"
To take a paper up that I let fall.,To pick up the paper that I dropped.
And is that paper nothing?,And that paper is nothing?
Nothing concerning me.,Nothing that concerns me.
Then let it lie for those that it concerns.,Then let it lie on the ground for the people it does concern.
Unless it have a false interpreter.,"Madam, it will not lie about what it concerns unless a liar reads it."
Some love of yours hath writ to you in rhyme.,Some lover of yours has written a poem to you.
"That I might sing it, madam, to a tune, Give me a note; your ladyship can set.","I’ll sing it, madam, to a tune. Give me the note to sing it in. Your ladyship can choose it."
Best sing it to the tune of “Light o’ Love.”,I place as little value as possible in such trifles. You should sing it to the tune of “Light o’ Love.”
It is too heavy for so light a tune.,The poem is too heavy for so light a tune.
Heavy! Belike it hath some burden then?,"Too heavy! I guess the note is serious, then?"
"Ay, and melodious were it, would you sing it.","Yes, and it would be melodious, too, if you’d sing it."
And why not you?,And why won’t you sing it?
I cannot reach so high.,I cannot reach such high notes.
"Let’s see your song. How now, minion?","Let’s see your poem. What is it, you hussy?"
Keep tune there still; so you will sing it out. And yet methinks I do not like this tune.,Keep your mood in check and get over your anger. I don’t like this new tune you’re singing.
You do not?,You don’t?
"No, madam, ’tis too sharp.","No, madame, it’s too sharp."
"You, minion, are too saucy.","You, hussy, are too sassy."
"Nay, now you are too flat, And mar the concord with too harsh a descant.","No, now you’re too flat. You’re ruining the harmony with a melody that’s too harsh. Your song only needs a tenor In other words, Julia needs a man. tenor ."
The mean is drowned with your unruly bass.,The tenor is ruined with your unruly bass.
"Indeed, I bid the base for Proteus.","Indeed, I sing for Proteus."
This babble shall not henceforth trouble me. Here is a coil with protestation!,This letter won’t trouble me from now on. Here’s a fuss over a love letter!
You would be fing’ring them to anger me.,"Go, get out of here, and leave the papers where they are. I know you’d try to pick them up just to anger me."
"She makes it strange, but she would be best pleased To be so angered with another letter.","She pretends not to care, but she would be happy to be so angered by another love letter."
"Nay, would I were so angered with the same!","No, I wish I were so angry with this one!"
"Injurious wasps, to feed on such sweet honey And kill the bees that yield it with your stings! I’ll kiss each several paper for amends. Look, here is writ “kind Julia.” Unkind Julia! I throw thy name against the bruising stones, Trampling contemptuously on thy disdain.","Stupid hands, to tear up such lovely words! Destructive fingers, to feed on such sweet words and then rip up the letter they came from! I’ll apologize by kissing each piece of paper. Here, this one says “kind Julia.” It should say “unkind Julia”! Out of revenge for my own ingratitude I’ll throw the paper on the floor and hatefully trample my name in disdain."
"And here is writ “love-wounded Proteus.” Poor wounded name! My bosom as a bed And thus I search it with a sovereign kiss. But twice or thrice was “Proteus” written down. Be calm, good wind, blow not a word away Till I have found each letter in the letter, Unto a ragged, fearful, hanging rock And throw it thence into the raging sea! Lo, here in one line is his name twice writ, “Poor forlorn Proteus, passionate Proteus, And yet I will not, sith so prettily He couples it to his complaining names. Thus will I fold them, one upon another. Now kiss, embrace, contend, do what you will.","And here’s one that says “love-wounded Proteus.” Poor wounded name! My breast will serve as your bed until your wounds are completely healed. I cleanse them with a healing kiss. But “Proteus” was written down two or three times. Be still, good wind, and don’t blow these pieces of paper away until I’ve found each word in the letter, except for the piece with my own name on it—may some whirlwind take that piece, hurl it onto a frightening cliff, and from there throw it into the raging sea! Look, his name is written twice in this line: “Poor forlorn Proteus, passionate Proteus, to the sweet Julia.” I’ll tear that last part off. Then again, maybe I won’t, since he tied it so prettily to his own sorrowful names. I’ll fold them up, one on top of another. Now the names may kiss, hug, battle, or do what they will."
"Dinner is ready, and your father stays.","Madame, dinner is ready, and your father waits for you."
"Well, let us go.","Well, let’s go then."
"What, shall these papers lie like telltales here?","What, should these papers just lie on the ground revealing everything?"
"If you respect them, best to take them up.","If you respect them, then it would be best to pick them up."
"Yet here they shall not lie, for catching cold.","No, you yelled at me for dropping them in the first place. But we shouldn’t leave them here or they’ll catch a cold."
I see you have a month’s mind to them.,I see you have a strong desire for them.
"Ay, madam, you may say what sights you see; I see things too, although you judge I wink.","Yes, madame, you can interpret my behavior as you like. But I see things, too, even though you think my eyes are closed."
"Come, come; will ’t please you go?","Come on, come on. Will you please hurry up?"
"Tell me, Panthino, what sad talk was that Wherewith my brother held you in the cloister?","Tell me, Panthino, what were you and my brother talking so seriously about in the walkway back there?"
"’Twas of his nephew Proteus, your son.","We were talking about his nephew, your son, Proteus."
"Why, what of him?",Why? What about him?
"Would suffer him to spend his youth at home, While other men, of slender reputation, Put forth their sons to seek preferment out, Some to the wars, to try their fortune there, Some to the studious universities. For any or for all these exercises He said that Proteus your son was meet, And did request me to importune you Which would be great impeachment to his age In having known no travel in his youth.","He wondered why your lordship would let him spend his youth here at home. Other men with lesser reputations send their sons to seek opportunities abroad, or to find their fortunes fighting in the wars, or to discover far away islands, or to study in the universities. He said that Proteus was capable of doing any or all of these things, and he asked me to urge you not to let him spend any more time at home. It would be a shame for him in old age not to have traveled in his youth."
"Nor need’st thou much importune me to that Whereon this month I have been hammering. And how he cannot be a perfect man, Not being tried and tutored in the world. Experience is by industry achieved And perfected by the swift course of time.","You don’t need to urge me on this matter. I’ve thought about it a lot this month. I’ve considered how much time he’s wasting, and how he cannot be a complete man without having some real-world trials and tests. Experience comes from hard work and is perfected over the course of time. Tell me, though, where would it be best to send him?"
"I think your lordship is not ignorant How his companion, youthful Valentine, Attends the Emperor in his royal court.","I think your lordship knows that his friend, the young Valentine, has gone off to visit the emperor in his royal court in Milan."
I know it well.,I’m fully aware.
"There shall he practice tilts and tournaments, Hear sweet discourse, converse with noblemen, And be in eye of every exercise Worthy his youth and nobleness of birth.","It would be good, I think, if your lordship sent him there. There he can take part in jousts and tournaments, listen to learned discussions, speak with noblemen, and witness everything befitting his youth and nobleness of birth."
"And that thou mayst perceive how well I like it, The execution of it shall make known. Even with the speediest expedition I will dispatch him to the Emperor’s court.","I like what you say. You’ve advised me well. And so you may see how much I like it, I’ll announce it publicly. I’ll send him off to the emperor’s court immediately."
With other gentlemen of good esteem Are journeying to salute the Emperor And to commend their service to his will.,"If it pleases you, Don Alphonso and some other noblemen are setting off tomorrow to visit the emperor and to offer their services to help him in whatever he needs."
Good company. With them shall Proteus go–,"Sounds like a good group. Proteus will go with them. PROTEUS enters, reading a letter."
And in good time! Now will we break with him.,Just in time! I’ll talk to him now.
"[To himself] Sweet love, sweet lines, sweet life! Here is her hand, the agent of her heart; Here is her oath for love, her honor’s pawn. O, that our fathers would applaud our loves, O heavenly Julia!","(to himself) Sweet love, sweet poetry, sweet life! Here is a letter in her handwriting, which does the bidding of her heart. Here is her pledge of love, which vows she will be faithful. Oh, I wish our fathers would approve of our love and consent to let us marry, sealing our happiness forever. Oh, heavenly Julia!"
How now? What letter are you reading there?,What’s that you say? What’s that letter you’re reading there?
"May ’t please your lordship, ’tis a word or two Of commendations sent from Valentine,","Your lordship, it’s just a short note of greeting from Valentine, delivered to me by a friend of his."
Lend me the letter. Let me see what news.,Give me the letter. Let me see what news it brings.
"There is no news, my lord, but that he writes How happily he lives, how well beloved And daily gracèd by the Emperor;","There is no news, my lord. He just writes how happy he is and that the emperor likes him and honors him each day. He wishes I were with him to share his good luck."
And how stand you affected to his wish?,And how do you feel about his wish?
"As one relying on your lordship’s will, And not depending on his friendly wish.",Like one who is used to following your orders and not able to honor Valentine’s wishes.
"My will is something sorted with his wish. For what I will, I will, and there an end. I am resolved that thou shalt spend some time With Valentinus in the Emperor’s court. What maintenance he from his friends receives, Tomorrow be in readiness to go. Excuse it not, for I am peremptory.","My wish is similar to Valentine’s. Now don’t think that I decided this rashly, because I get what I want, and that’s final. I’ve decided that you should spend some time with Valentine in the emperor’s court. I’ll provide you with the same money for room and board that he receives from his family. Be ready to go tomorrow. Don’t try to get out of it now, because I’ve made up my mind."
"My lord, I cannot be so soon provided. Please you, deliberate a day or two.","My lord, I can’t get ready that quickly. Please, think about this a day or two longer."
"No more of stay. Tomorrow thou must go. Come on, Panthino; you shall be employed To hasten on his expedition.","Look, whatever you want will be sent to you after you leave. You’re not going to stay here any longer. You must go tomorrow. Come on, Panthino, you will help get everything ready so he can leave as soon as possible."
"Thus have I shunned the fire for fear of burning, I feared to show my father Julia’s letter Lest he should take exceptions to my love, And with the vantage of mine own excuse Hath he excepted most against my love. The uncertain glory of an April day, Which now shows all the beauty of the sun, And by and by a cloud takes all away!","I dove into the sea to avoid being burned by the fire, and now I’m drowning instead. I was afraid to show Julia’s letter to my father because I didn’t want him to disapprove of my love, but taking advantage of my lie he raised more obstacles against it. Oh, our new love is like the uncertain days of April, which will be sunny one moment, and suddenly a cloud takes the sunshine away!"
"Sir Proteus, your father calls for you.","Sir Proteus, your father calls for you. He’s in a hurry, so I beg you, go quickly."
"Why, this it is: my heart accords thereto, And yet a thousand times it answers no.",This is how it is: my heart agrees to it but wants to say no a thousand times.
"Sir, your glove.","Sir, here is your glove."
Not mine. My gloves are on.,That isn’t mine. I’m already wearing my gloves.
"Why, then, this may be yours, for this is but one.","Well, then, this may be your glove, because it’s all by itself."
"Ha! let me see. Ay, give it me, it’s mine. Ah, Sylvia, Sylvia!","Ha! Let me see it. Yes, give it to me. It’s mine. Sweet accessory that Sylvia’s divine hand wears. Ah Sylvia, Sylvia!"
[Calling] Madam Sylvia! Madam Sylvia!,(calling) Madame Sylvia! Madama Sylvia!
"How now, sirrah?","What are you doing, pal Sirrah, the word used in Shakespeare’s original language, is used to address a social inferior. pal ?"
"She is not within hearing, sir.","She’s too far away to hear me, sir."
"Why, sir, who bade you call her?","But, sir, who asked you to call out for her?"
"Your worship, sir, or else I mistook.","You did, sir, or else I misunderstood you."
"Well, you’ll still be too forward.","Well, you’re always too presumptuous."
And yet I was last chidden for being too slow.,Even though last time I was scolded for being too slow.
"Go to, sir. Tell me, do you know Madam Sylvia?","Enough, sir. Tell me, do you know Madame Sylvia?"
She that your worship loves?,"The Madame Sylvia you love, your worship?"
"Why, how know you that I am in love?","Why, how do you know that I am in love?"
"Marry, by these special marks: first, you have learned, like Sir Proteus, to wreath your arms, like a malcontent; to relish a love-song, like a robin redbreast; to walk alone, like one that had the pestilence; to sigh, like a schoolboy that had lost his A B C; to weep, like a young wench that had buried her grandam; to fast, like one that takes diet; to watch, like one that fears robbing; to speak puling, like a beggar at Hallowmas. You were wont, when you laughed, to crow like a cock; when you walked, to walk like one of the lions; when you fasted, it was presently after dinner; when you looked sadly, it was for want of money. And now you are metamorphosed with a mistress, that when I look on you, I can hardly think you my master.","Because of all the right signs, of course: First, like Sir Proteus, you have started to fold your arms like you’re unhappy about something. You go around singing love songs like a redbreasted robin. You walk alone, like one who has the plague. You sigh like a schoolboy who has lost his textbook. You weep, like a young girl who has just buried her grandmother. You don’t eat, like one who’s on a diet. You can’t sleep, like one who fears being robbed. You whine, like a beggar on Hallowmas Hallowmas, or All Saint’s Day, took place on November , and it was customary on that day to give charity to beggars. like a beggar on Hallowmas It used to be that when you laughed, you crowed like a rooster. When you walked, you walked like a lion. When you didn’t eat, it was because you’d just finished lunch. When you looked sad, it was because you were out of money. And now a mistress has changed you. When I look at you, I can hardly recognize you as my master."
Are all these things perceived in me?,Can you see all these things in me?
They are all perceived without ye.,"They are all outside of you, in your outward appearance."
Without me? They cannot.,Outside of me? They cannot be outside of me.
"Without you? Nay, that’s certain, for, without you were so simple, none else would. But you are so without these follies that these follies are within you, and shine through you like the water in an urinal, that not an eye that sees you but is a physician to comment on your malady.","Outside of you? No, I’m sure, because if you weren’t so obvious no one would see them. But your appearance is so marked by these foolish traits that they must be inside you, and they shine through you as if you were water in a jar. Everyone that sees you is like a physician who knows why you’re sick."
"But tell me, dost thou know my lady Sylvia?","But tell me, do you know my lady Sylvia?"
She that you gaze on so as she sits at supper?,The woman you stare at while she sits at the dinner table?
Hast thou observed that? Even she I mean.,"Have you noticed me doing that? Yes, that’s the woman I mean."
"Why, sir, I know her not.","Well, sir, I don’t know her at all."
"Dost thou know her by my gazing on her, and yet know’st her not?",Do you know her only by my staring at her and not otherwise?
"Is she not hard-favored, sir?","Isn’t she ugly, sir?"
"Not so fair, boy, as well-favored.","She’s not as beautiful, boy, as she is gracious."
"Sir, I know that well enough.","Sir, I know that very well."
What dost thou know?,What do you know?
"That she is not so fair as, of you, well-favored.",The she isn’t as pretty as she is looked on favorably by you.
I mean that her beauty is exquisite but her favor infinite.,I mean that her beauty is exquisite but her graciousness is infinite.
That’s because the one is painted and the other out of all count.,That’s because the first one is done with makeup and the other can’t be counted.
How painted? And how out of count?,"What do you mean, done with makeup? And why can’t you count the other?"
"Marry, sir, so painted, to make her fair, that no man counts of her beauty.","I mean, sir, she’s so painted with makeup to look beautiful that no man values her beauty."
How esteem’st thou me? I account of her beauty.,"So what do you think of me, then? I think she’s very beautiful."
You never saw her since she was deformed.,You haven’t seen her since she was deformed.
How long hath she been deformed?,How long has she been deformed?
Ever since you loved her.,Ever since you fell in love with her.
"I have loved her ever since I saw her, and still I see her beautiful.","I have loved her ever since I first saw her, and I still think she’s beautiful."
"If you love her, you cannot see her.",If you love her then you cannot see her.
Why?,Why not?
"Because Love is blind. O, that you had mine eyes, or your own eyes had the lights they were wont to have when you chid at Sir Proteus for going ungartered!","Because Love is blind. Oh, if you had my eyes, or if you could see as clearly as you did when you scolded Sir Proteus for not wearing a garter Garters were used to keep stockings from falling, and going without garters was popularly considered a sign of lovesickness. not wearing a garter !"
What should I see then?,What would I see then?
"Your own present folly and her passing deformity; for he, being in love, could not see to garter his hose, and you, being in love, cannot see to put on your hose.","Your own current foolishness and her enormous deformity. Proteus, because he was in love, forgot to put on a garter to keep his stockings up, and you, also being in love, can’t see well enough to even put on your stockings."
"Belike, boy, then you are in love, for last morning you could not see to wipe my shoes.","Then maybe, boy, you’re in love, because this morning you couldn’t see well enough to polish my shoes."
"True, sir. I was in love with my bed. I thank you, you swinged me for my love, which makes me the bolder to chide you for yours.","True, sir. I was in love with my bed. I thank you—you hit me because I was so in love, which has made me bold enough to scold you for your love."
"In conclusion, I stand affected to her.","In conclusion, I’m in love with her."
I would you were set; so your affection would cease.,I wish you weren’t standing erect. Maybe then your love would go away.
Last night she enjoined me to write some lines to one she loves.,Last night she asked me to write some lines of poetry to the one she loves.
And have you?,And did you?
I have.,I did.
Are they not lamely writ?,"They’re badly written, aren’t they?"
"No, boy, but as well as I can do them. Peace, here she comes.","No, boy, I wrote them as well as I could. Be quiet now—here she comes."
"[Aside] O, excellent motion! O, exceeding puppet! Now will he interpret to her.","(aside) Oh, what a puppet show! Such a wonderful puppet she makes. Now he’ll give his commentary on the show."
"Madam and mistress, a thousand good-morrows.","Madame and mistress, I wish you a thousand good mornings."
"[Aside] O, give ye good even! Here’s a million of manners.",(aside) And God give you a good evening! What manners!
"Sir Valentine and servant, to you two thousand.","Sir Valentine and servant, to you I wish two thousand good mornings."
"[Aside] He should give her interest, and she gives it him.","(aside) He should outdo her in compliments, but she outdoes him."
"As you enjoined me, I have writ your letter Unto the secret, nameless friend of yours, Which I was much unwilling to proceed in But for my duty to your ladyship.","As you asked, I have written your letter to that secret, anonymous friend of yours. Though I didn’t want to do it, I wrote it out of duty to your ladyship."
"I thank you, gentle servant. ’Tis very clerkly done.","I thank you, gentle servant. It’s very smartly written."
"Now trust me, madam, it came hardly off; For, being ignorant to whom it goes, I writ at random, very doubtfully.","Now trust me, madame, it wasn’t easy to write this, because I had to be somewhat vague since I didn’t know to whom it would go."
Perchance you think too much of so much pains?,Perhaps you think it was too much trouble?
Please you command—a thousand times as much. And yet—,"No, madame. If it helps you, I will write a thousand times as many lines if you like. And yet . . ."
"A pretty period! Well, I guess the sequel; And yet I will not name it—and yet I care not— Meaning henceforth to trouble you no more.","A fine pause! I can guess what you’re going to say next. And yet I will not say it. And yet I don’t care. And yet you can take this back. And yet thanks anyway, meaning I won’t bother you again."
"[Aside] And yet you will, and yet another “yet.”","(aside) And yet you will, and yet say another “yet.”"
What means your ladyship? Do you not like it?,"What do you mean, your ladyship? Don’t you like it?"
"Yes, yes. The lines are very quaintly writ, Nay, take them.","Yes, yes. The lines are very nicely written, but since you wrote them so unwillingly, take them back. No, take them."
"Madam, they are for you.","Madame, they are for you."
"Ay, ay. You writ them, sir, at my request, But I will none of them. They are for you.","Yes, yes. You wrote them, sir, at my request, but I don’t want them. They are for you. I wish they had been more movingly written."
"Please you, I’ll write your ladyship another.","If it pleases you, I’ll write another for your ladyship."
"And when it’s writ, for my sake read it over. And if it please you, so; if not, why, so.","And when it’s written, read it over for my sake. And if it pleases you, fine. And if it doesn’t, well, that’s also fine."
"If it please me, madam, what then?","If it pleases me, madame, what then?"
"And so good morrow, servant.","Why, if it pleases you, then take it as payment for your hard work. And so good morning and goodbye to you, servant."
"[Aside] O jest unseen, inscrutable, invisible As a nose on a man’s face or a weathercock on a steeple! My master sues to her, and she hath taught her suitor, O excellent device! Was there ever heard a better, That my master, being scribe, to himself should write the letter?","(aside) Oh, that joke is as hard to see as a nose on a man’s face or a weathercock on a steeple! My master pleads with her, and she has taught him, her student, to become her teacher. What an excellent trick! Has anyone ever heard anything better than my master, the scribe, writing the letter to himself?"
"How now, sir? What, are you reasoning with yourself?","What’s that, sir? What are you reasoning to yourself over there?"
"Nay, I was rhyming. ’Tis you that have the reason.","No, I was rhyming. It’s you who’s been doing the reasoning."
To do what?,Reasoning what?
To be a spokesman from Madam Sylvia.,To be a spokesman for Madame Sylvia.
To whom?,To whom?
"To yourself. Why, she woos you by a figure.","To yourself. Why, she’s wooing you indirectly with this trick."
What figure?,What trick?
"By a letter, I should say.","By a letter, I should say."
"Why, she hath not writ to me.","But, she hasn’t written to me."
"What need she, when she hath made you write to yourself? Why, do you not perceive the jest?","Why would she need to when she’s made you write to yourself? Why, don’t you get the joke?"
"No, believe me.","No, believe me."
"No believing you, indeed, sir. But did you perceive her earnest?","No believing you, indeed, sir. Did you think she was being serious?"
"She gave me none, except an angry word.",She gave me nothing except an angry word.
"Why, she hath given you a letter.","Why, she’s given you a letter."
That’s the letter I writ to her friend.,That’s the letter I wrote to her friend.
"And that letter hath she delivered, and there an end.","And she’s delivered that letter, and that’s the end of it."
I would it were no worse.,I wish it were that good.
"For often have you writ to her, and she, in modesty, Or else for want of idle time, could not again reply; Or fearing else some messenger that might her mind discover, Herself hath taught her love himself to write unto her lover.","I promise you, it is that good. Because you’ve often written to her, and she, whether out of modesty or because she didn’t have the time, or out of fear that the messenger carrying the letter would discover her feelings, couldn’t reply. So she taught the man she loves to write to himself. I say all this very carefully, because I read it in her as if it were printed on a page. Why do you look so pensive, sir? It’s lunchtime."
I have dined.,I’ve already eaten.
"Ay, but hearken, sir: though the chameleon Love can feed on the air, I am one that am nourished by my victuals, and would fain have meat. O, be not like your mistress; be moved, be moved!","Yes, but listen, sir: even though the chameleon Love Chameleons were thought to feed on air since they can go long periods without eating. Here it also refers to love’s fickleness, since chameleons can change their color. the chameleon Love can feed off the air, I need real food for nourishment, and I’m eager to have meat. Oh, don’t be like your mistress—have a heart!"
"Have patience, gentle Julia.","Be patient, gentle Julia."
"I must, where is no remedy.","I have to be, since there is no way to fix the situation."
"When possibly I can, I will return.",I will return as soon as I can.
"If you turn not, you will return the sooner.","If you’re not unfaithful you’ll return sooner. Keep this to remember me by, for my sake. She gives him a ring."
"Why, then, we’ll make exchange; here, take you this.","Well, then, we’ll exchange rings. Here, you take this."
And seal the bargain with a holy kiss.,And we will seal the bargain with a holy kiss.
"Here is my hand for my true constancy; And when that hour o’erslips me in the day The next ensuing hour some foul mischance Torment me for my love’s forgetfulness! My father stays my coming. Answer not. The tide is now—nay, not thy tide of tears; Julia, farewell!","Here is my hand to show my fidelity. And if an hour in the day passes when I don’t sigh when thinking of you, Julia, then may some disaster torment me in the next hour to punish my love’s forgetfulness! My father is waiting for me. Don’t say anything. The tide is right for me to set out—no, not your tide of tears. Those tears will keep me here longer than I should stay. Farewell, Julia!"
"What, gone without a word? Ay, so true love should do; it cannot speak, For truth hath better deeds than words to grace it.","What, she’s gone without saying a word? Yes, that’s how it should be with true love. It cannot speak, because truth is best expressed through action, not words."
"Sir Proteus, you are stayed for.","Sir Proteus, everyone is waiting for you."
"Go. I come, I come. Alas! This parting strikes poor lovers dumb.","Go on. I’m coming, I’m coming. Too bad! This parting has left us poor lovers without words."
"Nay, ’twill be this hour ere I have done weeping. All the kind of the Lances have this very fault. I have received my proportion, like the prodigious son, and am going with Sir Proteus to the Imperial’s court. I think Crab, my dog, be the sourest-natured dog that lives. My mother weeping, my father wailing, my sister crying, our maid howling, our cat wringing her hands, and all our house in a great perplexity, yet did not this cruel-hearted cur shed one tear. He is a stone, a very pebblestone, and has no more pity in him than a dog. A Jew would have wept to have seen our parting. Why, my grandam, having no eyes, look you, wept herself blind at my parting. Nay, I’ll show you the manner of it. This shoe is my father. No, this left shoe is my father. No, no, this left shoe is my mother. Nay, that cannot be so neither. Yes, it is so, it is so–it hath the worser sole. This shoe, with the hole in it, is my mother, and this my father. A vengeance on ’t! There ’tis. Now, sir, this staff is my sister, for, look you, she is as white as a lily and as small as a wand. This hat is Nan, our maid. I am the dog. No, the dog is himself, and I am the dog—O, the dog is me, and I am myself. Ay, so, so. Now come I to my father: “Father, your blessing.” Now should not the shoe speak a word for weeping. Now should I kiss my father. Well, he weeps on. Now come I to my mother. O, that she could speak now like a moved woman! Well, I kiss her. Why there ’tis. Here’s my mother’s breath up and down. Now come I to my sister; mark the moan she makes. Now the dog all this while sheds not a tear nor speaks a word; but see how I lay the dust with my tears.","No, it’ll be this time tomorrow before I’ve stopped crying. All the members of the Lance family have this fault. I’ve received my portion of the family trait, just like the prodigious son Lance, who frequently confuses words, means to refer to the Bible story of the “prodigal son.” prodigious son , and now I’m going with Sir Proteus to the Imperial court in Milan. I think Crab, my dog, has the sourest personality of any dog alive. Even with my mother weeping, my father wailing, my sister crying, our maid howling, and our cat wringing her hands, this cruel-hearted mutt didn’t shed a single tear. Even a Jew would have wept to see us saying goodbye to each other. Why, my grandmother—who doesn’t have use of her eyes, you see—cried herself blind when I said goodbye. No, I’ll demonstrate what happened. This shoe represents my father. No, this left shoe is my father. No, no, this left shoe is my mother. No, that can’t be right either. Yes it is, it is—it has the sole that isn’t as good. This shoe, with the hole in it, is my mother, and this one is my father. Take that! That’s right now. Now, sir, this wooden stick is my sister, because, you see, it is as white as a lily and as thin as a twig. This hat is Nan, our maid. I am the dog. No wait, the dog is himself, and I am the dog—oh, I mean, the dog is me, and I am myself. Okay, okay, that’s it. Now I go to my father and say, “Father, give me your blessing.” Now the shoe can’t say a word because it’s crying so hard. Now I’ll kiss my father. Well, he keeps crying. Now I come to my mother. Oh, I wish this shoe could speak full of emotion now! Well, I kiss her. And that’s the way it happened. Here’s how she breathed from crying so much. Now I come to my sister. Listen to the moans she makes because she’s so sad. All the while the dog doesn’t shed a single tear or speak a word. See how I flatten the dust with my tears?"
"Lance, away, away, aboard! Thy master is shipped, and thou art to post after with oars. What’s the matter? Why weep’st thou, man? Away, ass! You’ll lose the tide if you tarry any longer.","Lance, go on, go on, board the ship! Your master is already aboard, and you’re supposed to hurry after him in a rowboat. What’s the matter? Why are you crying, man? Get on, you ass! You’ll lose the tide if you delay any longer."
It is no matter if the tied were lost; for it is the unkindest tied that ever any man tied.,"It doesn’t matter if this tied-up dog is lost, because it’s the unkindest tied-up thing any man ever tied up."
What’s the unkindest tide?,What’s the unkindest tide?
"Why, he that’s tied here, Crab, my dog.","Why, the dog that’s tied up right here—Crab, my dog."
"Tut, man, I mean thou’lt lose the flood, and in losing the flood, lose thy voyage, and in losing thy voyage, lose thy master, and, in losing thy master, lose thy service, and, in losing thy service—","No, no, man, I mean you’ll lose the ocean tide. And if you lose the ocean tide, then you’ll lose the whole trip, and if you lose the whole trip, then you’ll lose your master, and if you lose your master, then you’ll lose your job, and if you lose your job…"
Why dost thou stop my mouth?,Why are you covering my mouth?
For fear thou shouldst lose thy tongue.,Because I was afraid you’d lose your tongue.
Where should I lose my tongue?,Where would I lose my tongue?
In thy tale.,In your tale.
In thy tail!,Up your tail!
"Lose the tide, and the voyage, and the master, and the service, and the tied! Why, man, if the river were dry, I am able to fill it with my tears; if the wind were down, I could drive the boat with my sighs.","Lose the tide, and the voyage, and my master, and my job, and the tied-up dog! Why, man, if the river where the ship is moored dried up, I’d be able to fill it with my tears. And if the wind weren’t blowing, I could blow the boat forward with my sighs."
"Come, come away, man. I was sent to call thee.","Come on, come on, man. I was sent here to get you."
"Sir, call me what thou dar’st.","Sir, you can call me whatever you like."
Will thou go?,"Well, are you going to go?"
"Well, I will go.","Yes, I’ll go."
Servant!,Servant!
Mistress?,Mistress?
"Master, Sir Thurio frowns on you.","Master, Sir Thurio is frowning at you."
"Ay, boy, it’s for love.","Yes, boy, it’s because he’s in love."
Not of you.,Not with you.
"Of my mistress, then.","With my mistress, then."
’Twere good you knocked him.,It would be good if you punched him.
"Servant, you are sad.","Servant, you are sad."
"Indeed, madam, I seem so.","Indeed, madame, I seem to be."
Seem you that you are not?,It seems you’re sad when you are not?
Haply I do.,"As it happens, I seem to be something I’m not."
So do counterfeits.,Just like a fake.
So do you.,You also seem to be something you’re not.
What seem I that I am not?,What do I seem like that I am not?
Wise.,Wise.
What instance of the contrary?,What proof do you have to the contrary?
Your folly.,Your foolishness.
And how quote you my folly?,And what do you know of my foolishness?
I quote it in your jerkin.,Because you’re wearing a jerkin A short coat. jerkin .
My “jerkin” is a doublet.,My “jerkin” is actually a doublet A jacket. doublet .
"Well, then, I’ll double your folly.","Well, then, you’re doubly foolish."
How?,Why?
"What, angry, Sir Thurio? Do you change color?","What, are you angry, Sir Thurio? Is your face turning red?"
"Give him leave, madam; he is a kind of chameleon.","Leave him be, madame. He’s just a kind of chameleon."
That hath more mind to feed on your blood than live in your air.,"One that would rather feed off your blood, Valentine, than its usual diet of air."
"You have said, sir.","So you say, sir."
"Ay, sir, and done too, for this time.","Yes, sir, and it’ll be done, too."
"I know it well, sir; you always end ere you begin.","I know it’s done, sir. You always end before you begin."
"A fine volley of words, gentlemen, and quickly shot off.","A fine volley of words, gentlemen, and quickly fired."
"’Tis indeed, madam, we thank the giver.","It is indeed, madame. We have the giver to thank for that."
"Who is that, servant?","And who is the giver, servant?"
"Yourself, sweet lady, for you gave the fire. Sir Thurio borrows his wit from your ladyship’s looks, and spends what he borrows kindly in your company.","Yourself, sweet lady, for you provided the spark that set it off. Sir Thurio gets his witty remarks from your ladyship’s good looks, and appropriately he spends what he borrows in your presence."
"Sir, if you spend word for word with me, I shall make your wit bankrupt.","Sir, if you spar word for word with me, I shall make your wit dry up."
"I know it well, sir; you have an exchequer of words, and, I think, no other treasure to give your followers, for it appears, by their bare liveries, that they live by your bare words.","I know it well, sir. You have a whole treasury of words, and, I think, no other treasure to give your servants, since it appears, by their ragged clothing, that they live by your worthless words alone."
"No more, gentlemen, no more. Here comes my father.","No more, gentlemen, no more. Here comes my father."
"Now, daughter Sylvia, you are hard beset. Sir Valentine, your father is in good health. What say you to a letter from your friends Of much good news?","Now, my daughter Sylvia, you are being assaulted. Sir Valentine, your father is healthy. What would you say to a letter from your friends filled with good news?"
To any happy messenger from thence.,"My lord, I would be thankful to anyone who brought good news from home."
"Know ye Don Antonio, your countryman?","Do you know Don Antonio, who is also from your country?"
"Ay, my good lord, I know the gentleman To be of worth and worthy estimation,","Yes, my good lord. I know the gentleman is noble and has a good reputation, which is well-deserved."
Hath he not a son?,Doesn’t he have a son?
"Ay, my good lord, a son that well deserves The honor and regard of such a father.","Yes, my good lord, a son that is also deserving of the honor and reputation of his esteemed father."
You know him well?,Do you know him well?
"We have conversed and spent our hours together. And though myself have been an idle truant, Omitting the sweet benefit of time To clothe mine age with angel-like perfection, Made use and fair advantage of his days; His years but young, but his experience old; His head unmellowed, but his judgment ripe. And, in a word—for far behind his worth He is complete in feature and in mind With all good grace to grace a gentleman.","I know him as well as I know myself, since he and I have been in each other’s company and spent time together since we were infants. And even though I myself have been an unproductive delinquent and have wasted my youth on frivolity, Sir Proteus—that’s his name, you see—made good use of his time. He may be young, but he has the experience of a much older person. His hair isn’t gray, but his judgment is wise. Any praise I give is far less than he deserves, but in a word, he is perfect physically and mentally, with all the good graces of a true gentleman."
"Beshrew me, sir, but if he make this good, He is as worthy for an empress’ love Well, sir, this gentleman is come to me, With commendation from great potentates, And here he means to spend his time awhile. I think ’tis no unwelcome news to you.","Damn! Sir, if this account is true, he is as worthy of an empress’s love as he is fit to be an emperor’s adviser. Well, sir, this gentleman has come to me with commendations from powerful men, and he intends to spend his time here for a while. I think it’s good news for you."
"Should I have wished a thing, it had been he.","If I had wished for anything, it would have been for him to come."
"Welcome him then according to his worth. Sylvia, I speak to you, and you, Sir Thurio; For Valentine, I need not cite him to it. I will send him hither to you presently.","Then give him the welcome he deserves. I’m speaking to you, Sylvia, and you, Sir Thurio. Valentine needs no urging. I will send him to you here shortly."
Had come along with me but that his mistress Did hold his eyes locked in her crystal looks.,This is the gentlemen I told your ladyship would have come along with me had the woman he loved not captivated him with her beauty.
Belike that now she hath enfranchised them Upon some other pawn for fealty.,Perhaps now she’s freed him because some other lover has pledged devotion to her.
"Nay, sure, I think she holds them prisoners still.","No, I’m sure she still holds him prisoner."
"Nay, then he should be blind, and being blind How could he see his way to seek out you?","No, if that were true, then he would be blind, and if he were blind, how could he see to find his way to you?"
"Why, lady, Love hath twenty pair of eyes.","Why, lady, Love has twenty pairs of eyes."
They say that Love hath not an eye at all.,They say that Love is blind and has no eyes at all.
Upon a homely object Love can wink.,"Love has no eyes for people like you, Thurio. Love can shut its eyes to ugly things."
"Have done, have done. Here comes the gentleman.","Stop, stop. Here comes the gentleman."
"Welcome, dear Proteus!—Mistress, I beseech you, Confirm his welcome with some special favor.","Welcome, dear Proteus! Mistress, I beg you, make him feel welcome by giving him some sign of your affection."
If this be he you oft have wished to hear from.,His worthiness is enough for us to welcome here if he’s the one you’ve often wished to hear from.
"Mistress, it is. Sweet lady, entertain him To be my fellow servant to your ladyship.","Mistress, it is he. Sweet lady, take him into your service to be my fellow servant to your ladyship."
Too low a mistress for so high a servant.,I’m too unworthy a mistress for so noble a servant.
To have a look of such a worthy mistress.,"Not so, sweet lady. I’m too unworthy a servant to have caught a look from a worthy mistress."
"Leave off discourse of disability. Sweet lady, entertain him for your servant.","Don’t talk about unworthiness. Sweet lady, ask him to be your servant."
"My duty will I boast of, nothing else.","I’ll only boast of my duty, nothing else."
"Servant, you are welcome to a worthless mistress.","And duty never did go unrewarded. Servant, I, a worthless mistress, welcome you."
I’ll die on him that says so but yourself.,I’ll die fighting anyone who says that but you.
That you are welcome?,That you are welcome?
That you are worthless.,That you are worthless.
"Madam, my lord your father would speak with you.","Madame, my lord—your father—would like to speak with you."
I wait upon his pleasure.,I’ll be there in a moment.
"Come, Sir Thurio, Go with me. Once more, new servant, welcome. I’ll leave you to confer of home affairs.","Come, Sir Thurio, go with me. Again, I welcome you, new servant. I’ll leave you to talk with your friend about affairs back home. We look forward to seeing you when you’re finished."
We’ll both attend upon your ladyship.,"We’ll both be back to serve you shortly, your ladyship."
"Now tell me, how do all from whence you came?","Now tell me, how is everyone back home?"
Your friends are well and have them much commended.,Your friends are well and send their regards.
And how do yours?,And how are your friends?
I left them all in health.,They were all fine and healthy when I left.
"How does your lady, and how thrives your love?","How is your lady, and is your love thriving?"
My tales of love were wont to weary you; I know you joy not in a love discourse.,My tales of love used to bore you. I know you don’t enjoy talking about love.
"Ay, Proteus, but that life is altered now. Whose high imperious thoughts have punished me With bitter fasts, with penitential groans, With nightly tears, and daily heartsore sighs; For, in revenge of my contempt of love, And made them watchers of mine own heart’s sorrow. O gentle Proteus, Love’s a mighty lord, And hath so humbled me as I confess There is no woe to his correction, Now, no discourse, except it be of love; Now can I break my fast, dine, sup, and sleep Upon the very naked name of love.","Yes, Proteus, but my life is different now. I have atoned for condemning Love. Overbearing thoughts of love punish me with bitter periods of not eating, remorseful groans, nightly tears, and daily lovesick sighs. In revenge for my contempt, Love keeps me awake and makes my eyes watch the woman responsible for my heart’s sorrow. Oh, kind Proteus, Love’s a powerful ruler and has so humbled me that I confess there is no sorrow as bad as his punishment and no joy equal to being in love. Now, speak no more unless it’s about love. Now I can eat again, have lunch and dinner, and sleep thinking of love."
Enough. I read your fortune in your eye.,Enough. I knew how you felt from the look in your eyes. Was that the woman you worship like an idol?
Even she. And is she not a heavenly saint?,That was she. Isn’t she a heavenly saint?
"No, but she is an earthly paragon.","No, but she is a model of beauty here on earth."
Call her divine.,Call her a goddess.
I will not flatter her.,I will not fawn over her.
"O, flatter me, for love delights in praises.","Oh, flatter me, then, because those who are in love delight in praise."
"When I was sick, you gave me bitter pills, And I must minister the like to you.","When I was lovesick, you gave me the hard truth, and now I must give it to you."
"Then speak the truth by her; if not divine, Yet let her be a principality,","Then speak the truth about her. If she isn’t a goddess, then call her an angel who is superior to all the creatures on earth."
Except my mistress.,Except my mistress.
"Sweet, except not any, Except thou wilt except against my love.","No exceptions, my friend, unless you mean to insult my love."
Have I not reason to prefer mine own?,Don’t I have reason to put forward my own girl?
"She shall be dignified with this high honor: To bear my lady’s train, lest the base earth Should from her vesture chance to steal a kiss And, of so great a favor growing proud, And make rough winter everlastingly.","And I will help you to put her forward, too. She shall have the dignity of having this high honor: she can carry the train of my lady’s dress so that the dirty ground can’t steal a kiss of her clothing. If it did, the ground would swell so much with pride that it would no longer accept the roots of the summer flowers, and rough winter would last forever."
"Why, Valentine, what braggartism is this?","Geez, Valentine, why are you bragging so much?"
"Pardon me, Proteus, all I can is nothing To her whose worth makes other worthies nothing.","Pardon me, Proteus, any praise I can give is nothing in comparison with her. She is unique and alone among women."
"Then, let her alone.",Then leave her alone.
"Not for the world. Why, man, she is mine own, And I as rich in having such a jewel As twenty seas, if all their sand were pearl, Forgive me that I do not dream on thee, Because thou seest me dote upon my love. My foolish rival, that her father likes Only for his possessions are so huge, For love, thou know’st, is full of jealousy.","Not for the world. Why, man, she is mine, and having a jewel such as her, I’m as rich as if I had twenty oceans with sands made of pearls, water of nectar, and rocks of pure gold. Forgive me for not paying attention to you, because I’m doting on the woman I love, as you can tell. Her father likes my foolish rival, Thurio, because he has so much wealth. Thurio has gone with her, and I must follow after them, because love, as you know, is prone to jealousy."
But she loves you?,But does she love you?
"Ay, and we are betrothed. Nay, more, our marriage-hour, With all the cunning manner of our flight, The ladder made of cords, and all the means Plotted and ’greed on for my happiness. Good Proteus, go with me to my chamber, In these affairs to aid me with thy counsel.","Yes, and we’re engaged to be married. No, what’s more, we’ve determined all the details of how we’ll sneak away and elope—how I must climb up to her window on a ladder made of rope. Everything is arranged and agreed upon for my happiness. Good Proteus, go with me to my bedroom to give me some advice on these matters."
"I must unto the road, to disembark Some necessaries that I needs must use, And then I’ll presently attend you.",Go on ahead. I’ll find you shortly. I must go down to the harbor to bring ashore some necessities that I need. Then I’ll come see you right away.
Will you make haste?,Will you hurry?
"Even as one heat another heat expels, Or as one nail by strength drives out another, So the remembrance of my former love Is by a newer object quite forgotten. Her true perfection, or my false transgression That makes me, reasonless, to reason thus? She is fair; and so is Julia that I love— That I did love, for now my love is thawed, Bears no impression of the thing it was. Methinks my zeal to Valentine is cold, And that I love him not as I was wont. O, but I love his lady too, too much, How shall I dote on her with more advice, That thus without advice begin to love her! ’Tis but her picture I have yet beheld, And that hath dazzlèd my reason’s light; There is no reason but I shall be blind. If I can check my erring love, I will; If not, to compass her I’ll use my skill.","I will. Just as one heat can extinguish another At the time, it was believed that applying heat on a burn would take away the pain. one heat can extinguish another , or as one nail can drive another out with force, so too has a new love, Sylvia, driven out the memory of my former love, Julia. Is it my own attraction for her, or Valentine’s praise, or her own perfection, or going against my love for Julia that makes me feel this way? She is beautiful, but so is Julia, whom I love—whom I did love, because now my love for her has melted away, like a wax figure melted by a fire that no longer looks as it did. I think that my fondness for Valentine has diminished, too, and that I like him less than I used to. Oh, but I love his lady, Syliva, far too much, and that’s why I like him less now. How can I keep from loving her after further deliberation when I begin to love her with no deliberation at all! It’s only her surface I’ve seen so far, and that has already confused my sense of reason. But when I look at her perfection, there is no doubt I will be blind with love. If I can stop my love, I will. If not, I’ll use my skill to win her."
"Lance, by mine honesty, welcome to Milan!","Lance, honestly, welcome to Milan!"
"Forswear not thyself, sweet youth, for I am not welcome. I reckon this always, that a man is never undone till he be hanged, nor never welcome to a place till some certain shot be paid and the hostess say “Welcome!”","Don’t lie, my friend, because I am not welcome. I always believe a man is never sunk until he’s hanged, nor ever welcome to a place until the bill has been paid and the hostess says, “Welcome!”"
"Come on, you madcap, I’ll to the alehouse with you presently, where, for one shot of five pence, thou shalt have five thousand welcomes. But, sirrah, how did thy master part with Madam Julia?","Come you, you lunatic, I’ll go to the pub with you soon, where you can have five thousand welcomes for five pence. But tell me, pal, how did your master say goodbye to Madame Julia?"
"Marry, after they closed in earnest, they parted very fairly in jest.","You know, after they said their earnest goodbyes, they parted with a few jokes."
But shall she marry him?,But will she marry him?
No.,No.
How then? Shall he marry her?,What then? Will he marry her?
"No, neither.","No, not that either."
"What, are they broken?","What, have they broken up?"
"No, they are both as whole as a fish.","No, they’re as whole as ever."
"Why, then, how stands the matter with them?","Well, then, where do they stand on the matter?"
"Marry, thus: when it stands well with him, it stands well with her.","Indeed, that’s the way it is: when he stands erect, he’s in good standing with her."
What an ass art thou! I understand thee not.,What an ass you are! I don’t understand you.
"What a block art thou, that thou canst not! My staff understands me.","What a blockhead you are, since you can’t understand me! My wooden staff understands me."
What thou sayest?,What are you talking about?
"Ay, and what I do too. Look thee, I’ll but lean, and my staff understands me.","Yes, and it’s what I do, too. Look here—I simply have to lean, and my staff understands me."
"It stands under thee, indeed.","It stands under you, indeed."
"Why, stand-under and under-stand is all one.","Well, standing-under, under-standing—it’s all the same."
"But tell me true, will ’t be a match?","But tell me honestly, will they get married?"
"Ask my dog. If he say ay, it will; if he say no, it will; if he shake his tail and say nothing, it will.","Ask my dog. If he says yes, then they will. If he says no, then they will. If he shakes his tail and says nothing, then they will."
The conclusion is then that it will.,"So no matter what then, they will get married."
Thou shalt never get such a secret from me but by a parable.,You’ll never get me to reveal the secret except in riddles.
"’Tis well that I get it so. But, Lance, how sayest thou, that my master is become a notable lover?","It’s best that I find out that way. But, Lance, what can you tell me about the fact that my master has become a well-known lover?"
I never knew him otherwise.,I never knew him otherwise.
Than how?,Than what?
"A notable lubber, as thou reportest him to be.","A well-known lubber A big, clumsy oaf. lubber —and idiot, as you’ve told me he is."
"Why, thou whoreson ass, thou mistak’st me.","Why, you jackass son of a whore This term was often used jokingly. son of a whore ! You misunderstand me."
"Why, fool, I meant not thee. I meant thy master.","Why, fool, I didn’t mean you. I meant your master."
"I tell thee, my master is become a hot lover.","I tell you, my master has become an excellent lover."
"Why, I tell thee I care not, though he burn himself in love. If thou wilt, go with me to the alehouse; if not, thou art an Hebrew, a Jew, and not worth the name of a Christian.","Well, I tell you that I don’t really care, even if he burns himself from being so “hot” in love. Come with me to the pub if you will. If not, then you’re a Hebrew, a Jew, and not worthy to be called a Christian."
Why?,Why?
Because thou hast not so much charity in thee as to go to the ale with a Christian. Wilt thou go?,"Because you don’t even have enough compassion in you to go to the church’s ale festival A charitable festival in which ale was sold and the proceeds helped the church or went to the poor. the church’s ale festival with a Christian. So, are you coming?"
At thy service.,I’m at your service.
"To leave my Julia, shall I be forsworn; To love fair Sylvia, shall I be forsworn; To wrong my friend, I shall be much forsworn. And ev’n that power which gave me first my oath Love bade me swear, and Love bids me forswear. O sweet-suggesting Love, if thou hast sinned, Teach me, thy tempted subject, to excuse it! At first I did adore a twinkling star, Unheedful vows may heedfully be broken, And he wants wit that wants resolvèd will To learn his wit t’ exchange the bad for better. Fie, fie, unreverent tongue, to call her bad With twenty thousand soul-confirming oaths! I cannot leave to love, and yet I do; But there I leave to love where I should love. Julia I lose, and Valentine I lose. If I lose them, thus find I by their loss For Valentine, myself; for Julia, Sylvia. I to myself am dearer than a friend, For love is still most precious in itself, Shows Julia but a swarthy Ethiop. I will forget that Julia is alive, Remembering that my love to her is dead; And Valentine I’ll hold an enemy, I cannot now prove constant to myself Without some treachery used to Valentine. This night he meaneth with a corded ladder To climb celestial Sylvia’s chamber window, Now presently I’ll give her father notice Of their disguising and pretended flight, Who, all enraged, will banish Valentine; For Thurio, he intends, shall wed his daughter; By some sly trick blunt Thurio’s dull proceeding. Love, lend me wings to make my purpose swift, As thou hast lent me wit to plot this drift!","If I leave my Julia, I’ll break my vow and prove it a lie. If I love the beautiful Sylvia, I’ll break my vow. If I wrong my friend, Valentine, I’ll very much break my vow. And even that love that made me first declare my devotion provokes me to break my vow three times over. Love made me swear an oath, and love bids me to break it. Oh, sweet, seductive Love, if you have sinned, teach me, your tempted servant, how to pardon that sin. At first, I adored a twinkling star, but now I worship a heavenly sun. Vows made carelessly may be broken with careful thought, and the man who doesn’t have the will to teach his mind to trade something bad for something better lacks intelligence. Shame, shame! What a disrespectful tongue I have to call Julia bad, when my tongue has so often praised her superiority with twenty thousand devout oaths of love! I cannot stop loving her, and yet I do. But in ceasing to love her I go to the woman I should love. I lose Julia, and I lose Valentine. If I keep them, then I will lose myself. If I lose them, then I’ll gain myself instead of Valentine, and I’ll gain Sylvia instead of Julia. I cherish myself more than I cherish any friend, for love of oneself is always most precious. And Sylvia—with heaven, which made her white and beautiful, as witness—makes Julia look like a dark-skinned Ethiopian Fair skin was part of the European ideal of beauty. dark-skinned Ethiopian . I will forget that Julia is alive, and remember that my love for her is gone. I’ll consider Valentine an enemy and focus on Sylvia as a more important friend. I cannot now keep my promise to myself without acting treacherously toward Valentine. Tonight he plans to climb a rope ladder to the heavenly Sylvia’s bedroom window with me helping as his partner. Now I’ll go immediately and inform her father of their secret and their plan to run away. He will be enraged and will banish Valentine, because he intends Thurio to marry his daughter. With Valentine gone, I’ll ruin stupid Thurio’s plans with some sly trick. Love, lend me wings so that I may accomplish my aims quickly, as you’ve lent me cleverness to plot this scheme!"
"Counsel, Lucetta. Gentle girl, assist me; And ev’n in kind love I do conjure thee, Who art the table wherein all my thoughts Are visibly charactered and engraved, How, with my honor, I may undertake A journey to my loving Proteus.","I need your advice, Lucetta. Kind girl, help me. And even in kind love I ask you to help me. You are my drawing board where all my thoughts can be visibly laid out and arranged. Teach me and tell me a good way I can make a journey to my loving Proteus with my honor intact."
"Alas, the way is wearisome and long!","Unfortunately, the way is exhausting and long!"
"A true-devoted pilgrim is not weary Much less shall she that hath Love’s wings to fly, And when the flight is made to one so dear, Of such divine perfection, as Sir Proteus.","A truly devoted traveler doesn’t fear crossing entire kingdoms with small steps. She who has Love’s wings to help her fly will get much less tired, especially when she makes the flight to one who so dear and of such divine perfection as Sir Proteus."
Better forbear till Proteus make return.,It would be better if you waited until Proteus returns.
"Pity the dearth that I have pinèd in By longing for that food so long a time. Didst thou but know the inly touch of love, Thou wouldst as soon go kindle fire with snow","Oh, don’t you know that his looks are food for my soul? Pity the famine I’ve endured by being without that food for so long. If you only knew the inner touch of love, you would as soon try to start a fire with snow as you would try to snuff the love’s fire with words."
"I do not seek to quench your love’s hot fire, But qualify the fire’s extreme rage, Lest it should burn above the bounds of reason.",I do not seek to snuff your love’s hot fire but merely want to reduce the intensity of the fire so that it doesn’t burn out of your control.
"The more thou damm’st it up, the more it burns. Thou know’st, being stopped, impatiently doth rage; But when his fair course is not hinderèd, He makes sweet music with th’ enameled stones, Giving a gentle kiss to every sedge And so by many winding nooks he strays With willing sport to the wild ocean. Then let me go, and hinder not my course. I’ll be as patient as a gentle stream Till the last step have brought me to my love, And there I’ll rest, as after much turmoil A blessèd soul doth in Elysium.","The more you try to smother the fire, the more it burns. A gentle current of water will rage turbulently if blocked, you know. But when the current isn’t hindered, it makes a sweet noise over the smooth, shiny stones, giving a gentle kiss to every blade of sedge grass that it passes over on its journey. And so it wanders past many curvy nooks as it heads playfully to the wild ocean. So let me go, and don’t hinder my course. I’ll be as patient as a gentle stream and enjoy each tiring step, until the last step has brought me to my love. There I’ll rest, just like a blessed soul rests in Elysium The paradise of Greek myth. Elysium after a tumultuous life."
But in what habit will you go along?,But what clothing will you wear on your journey?
"The loose encounters of lascivious men. Gentle Lucetta, fit me with such weeds As may beseem some well-reputed page.","I won’t dress like a woman so that I can prevent the shameless sexual advances of lustful men. Kind Lucetta, outfit me with clothing appropriate for a young man from a good family."
"Why, then, your ladyship must cut your hair.","Well, then, your ladyship must cut your hair."
With twenty odd-conceited true-love knots. To be fantastic may become a youth Of greater time than I shall show to be.,"No, girl, I’ll tie it up in strange knots with silk ribbons. Fancy frills would look more appropriate on a young man who is slightly older than I’ll appear to be."
"What fashion, madam, shall I make your breeches?","In what style, madame, should I make your pants?"
"What compass will you wear your farthingale?” Why, even what fashion thou best likes, Lucetta.","Any style that won’t make men ask, “Tell me, good lord, how big around is the hoop in your hoop skirt?” Why, you should make them in whatever style you like best, Lucetta."
"You must needs have them with a codpiece, madam.","You’ll need to wear a cup in your crotch, madame."
"Out, out, Lucetta! That will be ill-favored.","Not so, Lucetta! That would be ugly."
Unless you have a codpiece to stick pins on.,"Tight leggings, madame, won’t be much of a disguise unless you wear a cup."
"Lucetta, as thou lov’st me, let me have What thou think’st meet and is most mannerly. But tell me, wench, how will the world repute me I fear me it will make me scandalized.","Lucetta, if you love me, let me have whatever you think is the most appropriate and fitting. But tell me, girl, what will people think of me for going on such a risky journey? I’m afraid it would make others think less of me."
"If you think so, then stay at home and go not.","If that’s what you think, then stay home and don’t go."
"Nay, that I will not.","No, I won’t stay."
"Then never dream on infamy, but go. No matter who’s displeased when you are gone. I fear me he will scarce be pleased withal.","Then go, and don’t worry what others might say. If Proteus is happy with your journey it doesn’t matter who’s displeased when they find out you’ve left. I’m afraid, though, that he won’t be pleased."
"That is the least, Lucetta, of my fear. A thousand oaths, an ocean of his tears, Warrant me welcome to my Proteus.","That is the least of my fears, Lucetta. A thousand oaths, an ocean of tears he cried, and many examples of his infinite love for me guarantee that Proteus will welcome me."
All these are servants to deceitful men.,These are the tricks of deceitful men.
"Base men that use them to so base effect! But truer stars did govern Proteus’ birth; His love sincere, his thoughts immaculate, His tears pure messengers sent from his heart, His heart as far from fraud as heaven from earth.","Crude men who use them for crude reasons! But more honest stars were in the sky when Proteus was born. He carries out what he says he will, his oaths are prophecies, his love is sincere, his thoughts are pure, his tears are honest messengers sent from his heart, and his heart is as far from lying as heaven is from earth."
Pray heaven he prove so when you come to him!,I pray to God he proves to be that way when you see him!
"To bear a hard opinion of his truth. Only deserve my love by loving him, And presently go with me to my chamber To take a note of what I stand in need of All that is mine I leave at thy dispose, My goods, my lands, my reputation; Only, in lieu thereof, dispatch me hence. Come, answer not, but to it presently!","Now, if you love me, don’t wrong him by doubting his honesty. Earn my love by loving him, and go with me right now to my bedroom to take note of what other items I need for my lovesick journey. All that I own I leave in your care, including my goods, my lands, and my reputation. Now help me leave right away. Come, don’t say anything, but let’s go immediately. I’m impatient from the delay."
"Sir Thurio, give us leave, I pray, awhile. We have some secrets to confer about.","Sir Thurio, leave us alone a while, please. We have some private matters to discuss."
"Now tell me, Proteus, what’s your will with me?","Now tell me, Proteus, why did you want to see me?"
"My gracious lord, that which I would discover But when I call to mind your gracious favors Done to me, undeserving as I am, My duty pricks me on to utter that Which else no worldly good should draw from me. This night intends to steal away your daughter. Myself am one made privy to the plot. I know you have determined to bestow her On Thurio, whom your gentle daughter hates; It would be much vexation to your age. Thus, for my duty’s sake, I rather chose To cross my friend in his intended drift Than, by concealing it, heap on your head Being unprevented, to your timeless grave.","My gracious lord, the rules of friendship require that I keep secret what I’m about to reveal to you. But when I think of all you’ve graciously done for me, undeserving as I am, my duty urges me to divulge what nothing else in the world could pull out of me. You should know, your highness, that Sir Valentine, my friend, intends to run away with your daughter tonight. I was informed of the plot. I know you’ve decided to marry her to Thurio, whom your lovely daughter hates. And should she be taken away from you this way, it would greatly upset you in your old age. So, for the sake of my duty, I chose to go against my friend and his intended scheme rather than hide it and burden your mind with a pack of sorrows that would weigh you down and send you to an early grave."
"Proteus, I thank thee for thine honest care, Which to requite, command me while I live. This love of theirs myself have often seen, And oftentimes have purposed to forbid Sir Valentine her company and my court. But, fearing lest my jealous aim might err, And so, unworthily, disgrace the man— I gave him gentle looks, thereby to find That which thyself hast now disclosed to me. And, that thou mayst perceive my fear of this, Knowing that tender youth is soon suggested, The key whereof myself have ever kept; And thence she cannot be conveyed away.","Proteus, I thank you for your honest concern. In return, ask anything you want of me while I still live. I’ve often happened to see this love of theirs for myself, when they’ve thought me asleep, and frequently I’ve considered forbidding Sir Valentine from seeing her or attending my court. But I’ve been afraid my jealousy might be misplaced, and as a result I might needlessly disgrace him—I’ve always disdained foolish impulsiveness. So I treated him kindly, only to learn of this deceitful plot you’ve just revealed. And, so you know how much I fear this, I make her sleep in one of the upper towers of the castle every night, because I know how impressionable youth can be led astray. I always keep the key myself, so that she cannot be taken away."
"Know, noble lord, they have devised a means How he her chamber window will ascend For which the youthful lover now is gone, And this way comes he with it presently, Where, if it please you, you may intercept him. But, good my lord, do it so cunningly For, love of you, not hate unto my friend, Hath made me publisher of this pretence.","You should know, my noble lord, they have devised a way for him to climb up to her bedroom window and bring her down using a rope ladder. That’s why this young lover has gone away, but he’s coming back with it soon, allowing you to intercept him, if you like. But, my good lord, be cunning about it, so that he won’t know I told you. It was because of my love for you, not hatred for my friend, that I told you of this plot."
"Upon mine honor, he shall never know That I had any light from thee of this.",I swear on my honor he will never know I learned this information from you.
"Adieu, my lord. Sir Valentine is coming.","Goodbye, my lord. Sir Valentine is coming."
"Sir Valentine, whither away so fast?","Sir Valentine, what’s the rush?"
"Please it your Grace, there is a messenger That stays to bear my letters to my friends, And I am going to deliver them.","If you please, Your Grace, there is a messenger that waits to take my letters to my friends, and I am on my way to deliver them."
Be they of much import?,Are they very important?
The tenor of them doth but signify My health and happy being at your court.,In essence they describe how healthy and happy I am here in your kingdom.
"Nay then, no matter. Stay with me awhile. I am to break with thee of some affairs ’Tis not unknown to thee that I have sought To match my friend Sir Thurio to my daughter.","No, then, they don’t matter. Stay with me a while. I want to tell you about some affairs that affect me personally, which you must keep secret. You’re surely aware that I have sought to match my friend Sir Thurio with my daughter."
"I know it well, my lord, and sure the match Were rich and honorable. Besides, the gentleman Beseeming such a wife as your fair daughter. Cannot your Grace win her to fancy him?","I know that very well, my lord, and surely the match would be profitable and honorable. Besides, the gentleman is full of virtue, wealth, worth, and qualities fit for a wife such as your beautiful daughter. Can Your Grace not get her to want him for a husband?"
"No, trust me. She is peevish, sullen, froward, Proud, disobedient, stubborn, lacking duty, Nor fearing me as if I were her father. And, may I say to thee, this pride of hers, Upon advice, hath drawn my love from her; And, where I thought the remnant of mine age I now am full resolved to take a wife, And turn her out to who will take her in. Then let her beauty be her wedding dower, For me and my possessions she esteems not.","No, trust me. She is irritable, sullen, difficult, proud, disobedient, stubborn, irresponsible, and neither does she care that she must obey me as my child nor does she fear me as her father. And, may I tell you, after thinking about it, this pride of hers has made me love her less. I once thought she would fulfill her duty and take care of me in my old age, but now I’ve resolved to find a new wife and marry my daughter off to whomever will take her. Her beauty will be her dowry, because she doesn’t value me or my possessions."
What would your Grace have me to do in this?,What part would Your Grace like me to play in this?
"There is a lady in Verona here Whom I affect, but she is nice and coy, And naught esteems my agèd eloquence. Now therefore would I have thee to my tutor— Besides, the fashion of the time is changed— How and which way I may bestow myself To be regarded in her sun-bright eye.","There is a lady here in Verona whom I love, but she is hard to please and coy and doesn’t appreciate my old-fashioned eloquence. I’d like you to teach me how to win her over, since I long ago forgot how to court a woman, and besides, times have changed. How should I act in order for her bright eyes to take notice of me?"
"Win her with gifts, if she respect not words. More than quick words do move a woman’s mind.","Win her with gifts if she doesn’t pay attention to words. Jewels, which can’t speak, often sway a woman’s mind more than fast-talking."
But she did scorn a present that I sent her.,But she already sneered at one present I sent her.
"A woman sometime scorns what best contents her. Send her another. Never give her o’er, If she do frown, ’tis not in hate of you, But rather to beget more love in you. If she do chide, ’tis not to have you gone, Forwhy the fools are mad if left alone. For “Get you gone,” she doth not mean “Away!’” Flatter and praise, commend, extol their graces; Though ne’er so black, say they have angels’ faces. That man that hath a tongue, I say, is no man","A woman will sometimes scorn the very thing that pleases her most. Send her another gift. Never give up, because her initial disdain will make her eventual feelings of love even stronger. If she frowns, it’s not out of hatred for you but rather to make you love her even more. If she chides you, it’s not so that you’ll go away, because the fools That is, women. the fools will go crazy if they’re left alone. Don’t be offended, whatever she says. By “Get out of here,” she doesn’t really mean, “Go away!” Flatter and praise women, compliment them, talk about their graces. Even if they have the blackest skin, say they have the faces of angels. In my opinion, any man that has a tongue isn’t really a man unless he can use it to win a woman."
"But she I mean is promised by her friends Unto a youthful gentleman of worth, And kept severely from resort of men, That no man hath access by day to her.","But the family of the woman I’m talking about has promised her to a young, worthy gentleman, and they’ve strictly kept her away from other men so that no man can meet with her during the day."
Why then I would resort to her by night.,"Why, then I would see her at night."
"Ay, but the doors be locked and keys kept safe, That no man hath recourse to her by night.","Yes, but the doors are locked and the keys tightly guarded so that no man has access to her at night."
What lets but one may enter at her window?,What’s stopping anyone from entering her room through the window?
"Her chamber is aloft, far from the ground, Without apparent hazard of his life.","Her room is high up, far from the ground, and it projects out like a shelf so that one cannot climb it without risking his life."
"Why then, a ladder quaintly made of cords To cast up, with a pair of anchoring hooks, Would serve to scale another Hero’s tower,","Why then, a skillfully made ladder of rope to toss up, with a pair of grappling hooks to anchor it, would work to scale this new Hero’s tower In Greek myth, Hero and Leander were lovers. Leander would swim across the Hellespont each night to see her, guided by a light she set at the top of a tower. new Hero’s tower , allowing another daring Leander to climb it."
"Now, as thou art a gentleman of blood, Advise me where I may have such a ladder.","Now, from one nobleman by birth to another, tell me where I can get such a ladder."
"When would you use it? Pray, sir, tell me that.","When would you need to use it? Please, sir, tell me that."
"This very night; for Love is like a child,","Tonight, because Love is like a child that wants everything he sees."
By seven o’clock I’ll get you such a ladder.,I’ll get you such a ladder by seven o’clock.
"But, hark thee, I will go to her alone; How shall I best convey the ladder thither?","But listen, I will go see her alone. What’s the best way to carry the ladder there?"
"It will be light, my lord, that you may bear it","It will be so light, my lord, that you’ll be able to carry it under any size cloak."
A cloak as long as thine will serve the turn?,A cloak as long as yours will do?
"Ay, my good lord.","Yes, my lord."
Then let me see thy cloak. I’ll get me one of such another length.,Then let me see your cloak. I’ll get one of that same length.
"Why, any cloak will serve the turn, my lord.","Why, any cloak will work just fine, my lord."
"How shall I fashion me to wear a cloak? I pray thee, let me feel thy cloak upon me.","How will I get used to wearing a cloak? Please, let me try on your cloak."
What letter is this same? What’s here? “To Sylvia”! And here an engine fit for my proceeding.,What’s this letter? What does it say? “To Sylvia”! And a tool for climbing like the kind you suggested. I’ll be so bold as to break the seal.
"“My thoughts do harbor with my Sylvia nightly, And slaves they are to me, that send them flying. O, could their master come and go as lightly, Himself would lodge where, senseless, they are lying! While I, their king, that thither them importune, Do curse the grace that with such grace hath blest them, Because myself do want my servants’ fortune. I curse myself, for they are sent by me, What’s here? ""Sylvia, this night I will enfranchise thee.” ’Tis so; and here’s the ladder for the purpose. Why, Phaëthon, for thou art Merops’ son And with thy daring folly burn the world? Wilt thou reach stars because they shine on thee? Go, base intruder, overweening slave! Bestow thy fawning smiles on equal mates, Is privilege for thy departure hence. Thank me for this more than for all the favors Which, all too much, I have bestowed on thee. But if thou linger in my territories Will give thee time to leave our royal court, By heaven, my wrath shall far exceed the love I ever bore my daughter or thyself. Begone! I will not hear thy vain excuse,","“My thoughts are with my Sylvia every night. They are like my slaves, and I send them flying. Oh, I wish that I could come and go to her just as easily, and lie where my thoughts, which cannot feel, are lying. Let my thoughts, which come to you as my messengers, rest in your breast, while I, their king who sent them, curse the luck that has blessed them with such favor. I want to be as fortunate as my slaves. I curse myself, too, because I sent them to the place where I, their lord, should be.” What’s this here at the end? “Sylvia, this night I will free you.” So that’s it, and here’s the ladder you planned to use. Why, Phaethon—for you are Merops’ son In Greek myth, Phaethon set the world on fire when he accidentally drove the chariot of his father, Helios, the sun god, too close to the earth. The Duke may refer to Valentine as “Merops’ son” as a way of calling him an illegitimate child, because even though Phaethon’s mother was married to Merops, she had Phaethon with Helios. Phaethon—for you are Merops’ son —will you try to drive the sun god’s chariot and burn the world in your brash idiocy? Will you grasp at the stars because they shine on you, as you grasp at my daughter for favoring you? Go, vulgar intruder, arrogant slave! Flash your fawning smiles on someone in your own class, and know that my patience—which is more than you deserve—allows you to leave this place. Thank me for this more than you’ve thanked me for all the favors I’ve granted you, which were too many. But if you stay here in my kingdom any longer than it takes to hurry away, then by heaven my anger will be far greater than any love I’ve ever felt for my daughter or for you. Get out of here! I will not hear your futile excuses. If you love your life, then you’ll hurry on your way from here."
"And why not death rather than living torment? To die is to be banished from myself, And Sylvia is myself. Banished from her Is self from self—a deadly banishment! What joy is joy, if Sylvia be not by? Unless it be to think that she is by And feed upon the shadow of perfection. Except I be by Sylvia in the night, Unless I look on Sylvia in the day, There is no day for me to look upon. She is my essence, and I leave to be If I be not by her fair influence I fly not death, to fly his deadly doom; Tarry I here, I but attend on death, But, fly I hence, I fly away from life.","Why not death instead of being tortured alive? To die is to be banished from myself, and Sylvia is my very being. Being banished from her is like being banished from myself—a deadly banishment! What good is light if I can’t see Sylvia? What joy is joy if Sylvia isn’t nearby? Unless I can be happy to think she is near and live on the mere thought of her perfection. Unless I can be near Sylvia in the night, there is no music in the nightingale’s singing. Unless I can look on Sylvia in the day, the day doesn’t even exist. She is my essence, and I’ll cease to exist if I’m not cared for, shined upon, valued, and kept alive by her gentle power. I don’t run from death if I run from the duke’s deadly threats. If I stay here, I am just waiting for death, but if I flee this place, then I flee from life itself."
"Run, boy, run, run, and seek him out.","Run, boy, run, run, and find him."
"So-ho, so-ho!",I found him! I found him!
What seest thou?,What do you see?
Him we go to find. There’s not a hair on ’s head but ’tis a Valentine.,"The man we were looking for. It’s a Valentine, down to the last hair."
Valentine?,Valentine?
No.,No.
Who then? His spirit?,Who are you then? His ghost?
Neither.,Not his ghost either.
What then?,What are you then?
Nothing.,Nothing.
"Can nothing speak? Master, shall I strike?","Can “nothing” speak? Master, should I attack?"
Who wouldst thou strike?,Who would you attack?
Nothing.,“Nothing.”
"Villain, forbear.","Stop, man."
"Why, sir, I’ll strike nothing. I pray you—","But, sir, I’m going to attack “nothing.” Please—"
"Sirrah, I say, forbear.—Friend Valentine, a word.","Man, I say stop. Valentine, my friend, let’s talk."
So much of bad already hath possessed them.,My ears are plugged up and cannot hear good news—they are already filled with bad news.
"Then in dumb silence will I bury mine, For they are harsh, untuneable, and bad.","Then I’ll stay silent and not tell you, because my news is harsh, uncomfortable to hear, and bad."
Is Sylvia dead?,Is Sylvia dead?
"No, Valentine.","No, Valentine."
"No Valentine, indeed, for sacred Sylvia. Hath she forsworn me?","There is no Valentine, indeed, for sacred Sylvia. Has she renounced her love for me?"
"No, Valentine.","No, Valentine."
"No Valentine, if Sylvia have forsworn me.",There’s no Valentine if Sylvia ever stops loving me. What’s your news?
"Sir, there is a proclamation that you are vanished.","Sir, there’s been an announcement that you are banished."
"That thou art banished—O, that’s the news!— From hence, from Sylvia, and from me thy friend.","That you are banished. Oh, that’s the news! Banished from here, from Sylvia, and from me, your friend."
"O, I have fed upon this woe already, Doth Sylvia know that I am banished?","Oh, I’ve already had my fill of this awful news, and now hearing more of it will make me sick. Does Sylvia know that I’m banished?"
"Ay, ay; and she hath offered to the doom— Which, unreversed, stands in effectual force— A sea of melting pearl, which some call tears. With them, upon her knees, her humble self, Wringing her hands, whose whiteness so became them As if but now they waxed pale for woe. But neither bended knees, pure hands held up, Could penetrate her uncompassionate sire, But Valentine, if he be ta’en, must die. Besides, her intercession chafed him so, When she for thy repeal was suppliant, With many bitter threats of biding there.","Yes, yes, and she’s responded to the sentence—which, if not revoked, will be enforced—by crying a sea of melting pearls, which some people call tears. She cried them out at the feet of her ill-mannered father, and did so upon her knees, wringing her hands, whose beautiful whiteness appropriately seemed to result from her sorrow. But neither begging on her knees, nor extending her pure hands, nor heaving sad sighs, deep groans, or crying tears that flow like silver streams would move her unsympathetic father to change his order that Valentine must die if captured. Besides, her begging to repeal the order of banishment against you bothered him so much that he ordered her locked away and threatened to keep her there permanently."
"No more, unless the next word that thou speak’st Have some malignant power upon my life! If so, I pray thee, breathe it in mine ear,","Don’t say any more, or the next word you say may kill me! If so, I beg you to whisper it into my ear as a final hymn for my endless misery."
"Cease to lament for that thou canst not help, And study help for that which thou lament’st. Time is the nurse and breeder of all good. Here if thou stay thou canst not see thy love; Hope is a lover’s staff; walk hence with that And manage it against despairing thoughts. Thy letters may be here, though thou art hence, Which, being writ to me, shall be delivered The time now serves not to expostulate. Come, I’ll convey thee through the city gate, And, ere I part with thee confer at large Of all that may concern thy love affairs. Regard thy danger, and along with me!","Stop grieving over things you can’t help, and think of ways to fix the things that cause you grief. Time nurtures and breeds all good things. If you stay here, you can’t see your love. Besides, staying here will shorten your life. Hope is a lover’s crutch—walk forward with it and use it to prop yourself up against despair. Your letters can be here though you are far away, and if you write them to me I will deliver them to the milk-white breast of your love. Now is not the time to complain. Come, I’ll escort you through the city gate, and we can talk about everything concerning your love affairs before I part with you. Consider the danger you’re in, if not for yourself then for your love of Sylvia, and come along with me!"
"I pray thee, Lance, an if thou seest my boy, Bid him make haste and meet me at the north gate.","Please, Lance, if you see my servant boy, tell him to hurry and meet me at the north gate."
"Go, sirrah, find him out.—Come, Valentine.","Go, boy, find him. Come, Valentine."
O my dear Sylvia! Hapless Valentine!,"Oh, my dear Sylvia! Unlucky Valentine!"
"I am but a fool, look you, and yet I have the wit to think my master is a kind of a knave. But that’s all one, if he be but one knave. He lives not now that knows me to be in love, yet I am in love. But a team of horse shall not pluck that from me, nor who ’tis I love. And yet ’tis a woman, but what woman, I will not tell myself. And yet ’tis a milkmaid. Yet ’tis not a maid, for she hath had gossips. Yet ’tis a maid, for she is her master’s maid, and serves for wages. She hath more qualities than a water spaniel, which is much in a bare Christian.","You know, I’m just a fool, but I still have enough brains to think my master is kind of a scoundrel. But it’s fine if he is a scoundrel if he’s only a scoundrel regarding love. No one thinks I am in love, yet I am. But a whole team of horses couldn’t tear that secret, or who it is I love, out of me. And yet it’s a woman, but what kind of woman I won’t even say to myself. It’s a milkmaid, but she’s not a virgin since she has given birth The term “gossips” in Shakespeare’s original language refers to women who assist in childbirth and the people who serve as sponsors in the baptism of a newborn, suggesting that the woman has had a child. since she has given birth . Yet she is a maid, because she is her master’s maid and works for wages. She has more abilities than a water spaniel, which is a lot for a simple Christian."
"Here is the catalog of her condition. “Imprimis: She can fetch and carry.” Why, a horse can do no more. Nay, a horse cannot fetch, but only carry; therefore is she better than a jade. “Item: She can milk.” Look you, a sweet virtue in a maid with clean hands.","Here is a list of all her traits. “In the first place, she can fetch and carry.” Why, a horse can’t do more. No, a horse can’t fetch. It can only carry. Therefore, she is better than a horse. “Also: she can milk.” Look at that! What a sweet virtue for a maid with clean hands."
"How now, Signor Lance, what news with your mastership?","How goes it, Signor Lance? Any news of your mastership?"
"With my master’s ship? Why, it is at sea.","About my master’s ship? Well, it’s at sea."
"Well, your old vice still: mistake the word. What news, then, in your paper?","There you go again—you misunderstand me. What news is that, then, on your piece of paper?"
The black’st news that ever thou heardest.,The darkest news that you’ve ever heard.
"Why, man, how black?","Why, man, how dark?"
"Why, as black as ink.","Well, as dark as ink."
Let me read them.,Let me read it.
"Fie on thee, jolt-head! Thou canst not read.","Get away, you blockhead! You can’t read."
Thou liest. I can.,You lie. I can.
I will try thee. Tell me this: who begot thee?,I’ll test you. Tell me: who conceived you?
"Marry, the son of my grandfather.","The son of my grandfather, of course."
"O, illiterate loiterer! It was the son of thy grandmother. This proves that thou canst not read.","Oh, illiterate loafer! It was the son of your grandmother. This proves that you cannot read."
"Come, fool, come. Try me in thy paper.","Come on, fool, come on. Test me with the paper."
"There, [giving him the paper] and Saint Nicholas be thy speed!","(giving him the paper) There, and Saint Nicholas Patron saint of scholars and schoolchildren. Saint Nicholas protect you!"
"[Reads.] “Imprimis, She can milk.”","(reads) “In the first place, she can milk.”"
"Ay, that she can.","Yes, that she can."
“Item: She brews good ale.”,“Also: she can brew good beer.”
"And thereof comes the proverb: “Blessing of your heart, you brew good ale.”","And that’s where the proverb comes in—“Blessing of your heart, you brew good ale.”"
“Item: She can sew.”,“Also: she can sew.”
That’s as much as to say “Can she so?”,"To that I say, “Can she so?”"
“Item: She can knit.”,“Also: she can knit.”
"What need a man care for a stock with a wench, when she can knit him a stock?","What does a man care if a girl’s dowry doesn’t include stockings, when she can knit him a stocking?"
“Item: She can wash and scour.”,“Also: she can wash and scour.”
"A special virtue, for then she need not be washed and scoured.","That’s a special virtue, because then she doesn’t need to be washed and scoured to keep her in line “Washed and scoured” was a slang phrase meaning “knocked down and beaten.” washed and scoured to keep her in line ."
“Item: She can spin.”,“Also: she can spin yarn.”
"Then may I set the world on wheels, when she can spin for her living.","Then I can take it easy, since she can spin for a living."
“Item: She hath many nameless virtues.”,“Also: she has many virtues that can’t be named.”
"That’s as much as to say, bastard virtues, that indeed know not their fathers and therefore have no names.",That’s the same as saying they’re bastard virtues that don’t know their fathers and therefore have no names.
Here follow her vices.,Now comes a list of her vices.
Close at the heels of her virtues.,Following right behind her virtues.
"“Item: She is not to be kissed fasting, in respect of her breath.”","“Also: she is not to be kissed while fasting, because of her bad breath.”"
"Well, that fault may be mended with a breakfast. Read on.","Well, that fault can be fixed with some breakfast. Read on."
“Item: She hath a sweet mouth.”,“Also: she has a sweet tooth.”
That makes amends for her sour breath.,That makes up for her sour breath.
“Item: She doth talk in her sleep.”,“Also: she talks in her sleep.”
"It’s no matter for that, so she sleep not in her talk.","That doesn’t matter, as long as she doesn’t sleep while she talks."
“Item: She is slow in words.”,“Also: she is slow with words.”
"O villain, that set this down among her vices! To be slow in words is a woman’s only virtue. I pray thee, out with ’t, and place it for her chief virtue.","What a scoundrel who listed this among her vices! To speak little is a woman’s only virtue! Please, cross that out and list it as her chief virtue."
“Item: She is proud.”,“Also: she is proud.”
"Out with that too; it was Eve’s legacy, and cannot be ta’en from her.","Cross that out, too. It was Eve’s legacy to all women, so it can’t be taken from her."
“Item: She hath no teeth.”,“Also: she has no teeth.”
"I care not for that neither, because I love crusts.","I don’t care about that either, because I love gums."
“Item: She is curst.”,“Also: she’s a bitch.”
"Well, the best is, she hath no teeth to bite.","Well, at least she has no teeth with which to bite."
“Item: She will often praise her liquor.”,“Also: she will taste and appraise her liquor before buying it.”
"If her liquor be good, she shall. If she will not, I will, for good things should be praised.","If her liquor is good, then she should. And if she won’t, I will, because good things should be praised."
“Item: She is too liberal.”,“Also: she is too loose.”
"Of her tongue she cannot, for that’s writ down she is slow of; of her purse she shall not, for that I’ll keep shut. Now of another thing she may, and that cannot I help. Well, proceed.","That can’t mean her tongue, since it’s already written down that she’s slow with words. And it isn’t about her purse, because I’ll keep that shut. Now she may be loose in another way, and that I can’t help. Well, keep going."
"“Item: She hath more hair than wit, and more faults than hairs, and more wealth than faults.”","“Also: she has more hair than brains, and more faults than hair, and more wealth than faults.”"
Stop there; I’ll have her; she was mine and not mine twice or thrice in that last article. Rehearse that once more.,Stop right there. I’ll take her. She was mine and then not mine two or three times in that last item. Repeat it once more.
“Item: She hath more hair than wit—”,“Also: she has more hair than brains—”
"More hair than wit? It may be: I’ll prove it. The cover of the salt hides the salt, and therefore it is more than the salt; the hair that covers the wit is more than the wit, for the greater hides the less. What’s next?","More hair than brains? Maybe that’s so. I’ll prove it. The top of a saltshaker hides the salt, so therefore it is more than the salt. The hair that covers the brains is more than the brains, because the larger thing hides the smaller thing. Okay, what’s next?"
“And more faults than hairs—”,“And more faults than hair—”
"That’s monstrous. O, that that were out!","That’s awful. Oh, I wish that weren’t on the list!"
“And more wealth than faults.”,“And more wealth than the faults.”
"Why, that word makes the faults gracious. Well, I’ll have her; an if it be a match, as nothing is impossible—","Why, that line makes the many faults a good thing. Well, I’ll have her. If it is a good match, since nothing is impossible—”"
What then?,What then?
"Why, then will I tell thee—that thy master stays for thee at the north gate.","Why, then I’ll tell you that your master is waiting for you at the north gate."
For me?,For me?
"For thee? Ay, who art thou? He hath stayed for a better man than thee.","For you? Yeah, who are you? He’s been waiting for a better man than you."
And must I go to him?,And I have to go to him?
"Thou must run to him, for thou hast stayed so long that going will scarce serve the turn.","You must run to him, because you have stayed so long that simply walking isn’t going to cut it."
Why didst not tell me sooner? Pox of your love letters!,Why didn’t you tell me sooner? A disease take your love letters!
"Now will he be swinged for reading my letter—an unmannerly slave, that will thrust himself into secrets! I’ll after, to rejoice in the boy’s correction.","Now he’ll get beaten for reading my letter. What a rude slave for having stuck his nose in someone else’s secrets. I’ll follow after him, to rejoice in seeing his master whip him."
"Sir Thurio, fear not but that she will love you, Now Valentine is banished from her sight.","Sir Thurio, don’t worry. She is sure to love you now that Valentine has been banished from her sight."
"Since his exile she hath despised me most, Forsworn my company and railed at me,","Since his exile she has despised me even more, she has refused to be around me, and she has condemned me, so that I have no hope of winning her."
"This weak impress of love is as a figure Trenchèd in ice, which with an hour’s heat Dissolves to water and doth lose his form. A little time will melt her frozen thoughts,","The weak impression love makes on the heart is like an ice sculpture, which melts into water and loses its form after being exposed to heat for just an hour. A little time will ease her disdain, and worthless Valentine will be forgotten."
"How now, Sir Proteus? Is your countryman, According to our proclamation, gone?","How’s it going, Sir Proteus? Is your countryman gone, as our proclamation commands?"
"Gone, my good lord.","He’s gone, my good lord."
My daughter takes his going grievously.,My daughter is upset over his departure.
"A little time, my lord, will kill that grief.","A little time, my lord, will kill that grief."
"So I believe, but Thurio thinks not so. Proteus, the good conceit I hold of thee— For thou hast shown some sign of good desert— Makes me the better to confer with thee.","That’s what I believe, too, but Thurio doesn’t think so. Proteus, the high esteem I have for you—for you’ve shown me that you deserve it—makes me more inclined to discuss this matter with you."
Let me not live to look upon Your Grace.,Let me die if I ever live to see the day I am disloyal to Your Grace.
Thou know’st how willingly I would effect The match between Sir Thurio and my daughter.,You know how much I would like to arrange a marriage between Sir Thurio and my daughter.
"I do, my lord.","I do, my lord."
How she opposes her against my will.,"And also, I think, you’re aware that she refuses to obey my will?"
"She did, my lord, when Valentine was here.","She refused when Valentine was here, my lord."
"Ay, and perversely she persevers so. What might we do to make the girl forget","Yes, and oddly enough she continues to oppose me. What can we do to make this girl forget her love for Valentine and love Sir Thurio?"
"The best way is to slander Valentine With falsehood, cowardice, and poor descent, Three things that women highly hold in hate.","The best way is to slander Valentine and make up lies about his infidelity, cowardice, and poor parentage—three things women strongly hate."
"Ay, but she’ll think that it is spoke in hate.","Yes, but she’ll think these things are only said out of hatred for him."
Therefore it must with circumstance be spoken By one whom she esteemeth as his friend.,"Yes, if his enemy tells her these things. Therefore, someone she believes to be his friend must tell her the details."
Then you must undertake to slander him.,Then you must make it your job to slander him.
"And that, my lord, I shall be loath to do. Especially against his very friend.","I would hate to do that, my lord. It’s a job unsuitable for a gentleman, especially against his own friend."
"Where your good word cannot advantage him, Your slander never can endamage him; Therefore the office is indifferent,","If your praise can’t help him, then your slander can’t do him any harm. Therefore the task is neither good nor bad, since I, your friend, ask you to do it."
"You have prevailed, my lord. If I can do it By aught that I can speak in his dispraise, She shall not long continue love to him. But say this weed her love from Valentine,","You’ve convinced me, my lord. If I do what I can to speak against him, she won’t love him much longer. But even if she stops loving Valentine, it doesn’t mean she will love Sir Thurio."
"Therefore, as you unwind her love from him, Lest it should ravel and be good to none, You must provide to bottom it on me; Which must be done by praising me as much","So, as you break down her love for him, you must build it back up around me, so that it doesn’t come apart and become useless to everyone. You must do this by praising me as much as you dispraise Sir Valentine."
"And, Proteus, we dare trust you in this kind Because we know, on Valentine’s report, You are already Love’s firm votary And cannot soon revolt and change your mind. Where you with Sylvia may confer at large; For she is lumpish, heavy, melancholy, And, for your friend’s sake, will be glad of you, Where you may temper her by your persuasion","And, Proteus, we feel we can trust you with this task because we know, from what Valentine told us, that you’re already in love and can’t quickly fall out of love. For this reason you will be allowed to speak to Sylvia as you like. She is sad, sullen, and melancholy, and she’ll be happy to see you because you’re close to Valentine. Then you can shape her by your persuasion to hate young Valentine and love my friend, Sir Thurio."
"As much as I can do, I will effect. But you, Sir Thurio, are not sharp enough; You must lay lime to tangle her desires By wailful sonnets, whose composèd rhymes","I will do as much as I can. But you, Sir Thurio, aren’t doing enough to win her. To entice her and capture her desires, you must write sonnets whose well-crafted rhymes should be filled with vows of devotion."
"Ay, much is the force of heaven-bred poesy.","Yes, poetry bred by heaven is very powerful."
"Say that upon the altar of her beauty You sacrifice your tears, your sighs, your heart. Write till your ink be dry, and with your tears That may discover such integrity: For Orpheus’ lute was strung with poets’ sinews, Whose golden touch could soften steel and stones, Make tigers tame, and huge leviathans After your dire-lamenting elegies, Visit by night your lady’s chamber window With some sweet consort. To their instruments Tune a deploring dump; the night’s dead silence This, or else nothing, will inherit her.","Say that you sacrifice your tears, your sighs, and your heart on the altar of her beauty. Write until your ink dries up and then moisten it again with your tears, and craft some emotional line that reveals your sincerity—after all, Orpheus’s lute In Greek myth, Orpheus was known as such a masterful musician that animals and even inanimate objects would follow him. He played the lute, a stringed instrument played by plucking. Orpheus’s lute was made from the same stuff as poetry and could soften steel and stones, make tigers tame, and cause huge whales to leave the deep ocean and dance on the sand. After you give her your love poems, go to her bedroom window at night with a group of musicians. While they play, sing a sad melody, and the silent night will enhance such sweet heartsick yearning. If that doesn’t win her, nothing will."
This discipline shows thou hast been in love.,Your instructions show that you’ve been in love before.
"And thy advice this night I’ll put in practice. Therefore, sweet Proteus, my direction-giver, To sort some gentlemen well skilled in music. I have a sonnet that will serve the turn To give the onset to thy good advice.","And I’ll act on your advice tonight. Therefore, good Proteus, my guide, let’s go into the city to find some gentlemen skilled at playing instruments. I have a sonnet that will work to set your plan into action."
"About it, gentlemen!","Let’s do it, gentlemen!"
And afterward determine our proceedings.,We’ll visit Your Grace after supper and then determine our next move.
Even now about it! I will pardon you.,"Like I said, let’s do it! You’re excused."
"Fellows, stand fast. I see a passenger.","Men, get ready. I see a traveler."
"If there be ten, shrink not, but down with ’em.","Even if there are ten of them, don’t back down. Take them down."
"Stand, sir! And throw us that you have about ye. If not, we’ll make you sit, and rifle you.","Stop, sir! Give us what you have on you. If you don’t, we’ll make you sit and we’ll search you."
That all the travelers do fear so much.,"Sir, we’re ruined. These are the bandits that all the travelers in this area fear so much."
My friends—,My friends—
"That’s not so, sir. We are your enemies.","That’s not how it is, sir. We are your enemies."
Peace! We’ll hear him.,Quiet! Let’s hear him out.
"Ay, by my beard will we, for he is a proper man.","Yeah, by the hair on my chin we’ll hear him out, because he is a handsome man."
"Then know that I have little wealth to lose. A man I am, crossed with adversity; My riches are these poor habiliments, Of which if you should here disfurnish me","You should know that I have little wealth to lose. I am a man who’s been struck by hardship. My only riches are these poor clothes I’m wearing, and if you take them then you take the sum total of everything I own."
Whither travel you?,Where are you going?
To Verona.,To Verona.
Whence came you?,Where did you come from?
From Milan.,From Milan.
Have you long sojourned there?,How long were you there?
"Some sixteen months, and longer might have stayed If crooked fortune had not thwarted me.","About sixteen months, and I might have stayed longer if bad luck hadn’t thwarted me."
What! were you banished thence?,What! Were you banished?
I was.,I was.
For what offence?,For what crime?
"For that which now torments me to rehearse: I killed a man, whose death I much repent, But yet I slew him manfully in fight Without false vantage or base treachery.","For something that now hurts me to repeat: I killed a man, whose death I greatly regret, even though I killed him in a fair fight without deceit or wicked treachery."
But were you banished for so small a fault?,"Why, never regret it if that’s the way it happened. Were you really banished for such a small offense?"
"I was, and held me glad of such a doom.","I was, and was grateful to have just been banished."
Have you the tongues?,Do you speak any other languages?
"My youthful travel therein made me happy,","I traveled when I was young, which made me happy. Otherwise, I would have been miserable."
"By the bare scalp of Robin Hood’s fat friar, This fellow were a king for our wild faction!",By the bald head of Robin Hood’s fat Friar Tuck! This fellow would make a great king for our group of bandits!
"We’ll have him. Sirs, a word.","We’ll take him. Sirs, a word with you all."
"Master, be one of them.","Master, become one of them. It’s an honorable kind of thievery."
"Peace, villain!","Quiet, rascal!"
[Returning to Valentine] Tell us this: have you anything to take to?,(returning to Valentine) Tell us this: do you have any way to support yourself?
Nothing but my fortune.,Nothing but my luck.
"Know, then, that some of us are gentlemen, Thrust from the company of awful men. Myself was from Verona banishèd For practicing to steal away a lady, An heir, and near allied unto the Duke.","You should know, then, that some of us are gentlemen who were forced out of respectable society by our unrestrained youth. I myself was banished from Verona for planning to elope with a lady, an heir who was close to the Duke."
"Who, in my mood, I stabbed unto the heart.",And I am from Mantua. I stabbed a gentleman in the heart out of anger.
"And I for suchlike petty crimes as these. But to the purpose—for we cite our faults That they may hold excused our lawless lives; With goodly shape, and by your own report A linguist, and a man of such perfection As we do in our quality much want—","And I was banished for such petty crimes like these. But to get to the point, we state our crimes in part because they explain why we live lives of lawlessness, and also partly because seeing that you’re attractive, and by your own description a linguist, and since we are in need of a man of such qualities in our profession—"
"Indeed, because you are a banished man, Are you content to be our general? To make a virtue of necessity And live, as we do, in this wilderness?","In fact, because you are a banished man, and for that more than any other reason, we’d like to speak to you. Would you like to be our leader, to consider poverty an asset, and live as we do in this forest?"
"What sayst thou? Wilt thou be of our consort? We’ll do thee homage, and be ruled by thee, Love thee as our commander and our king.","What do you say? Will you join our band of highwaymen? Say yes, and become our captain. We’ll respect you, be ruled by you, and love you as our leader and our king."
But if thou scorn our courtesy thou diest.,But if you reject our offer you die.
Thou shalt not live to brag what we have offered.,You won’t live to brag about what we’ve offered.
Provided that you do no outrages On silly women or poor passengers.,"I accept your offer and will live with you, provided that you do not harm any helpless women or poor passengers."
"No, we detest such vile base practices. Come, go with us. We’ll bring thee to our crews Which, with ourselves, all rest at thy dispose.","No, we detest such vile, wicked practices. Come, go with us. We’ll take you to the rest of our band and show you all the treasure we have, which along with ourselves is at your disposal."
"Already have I been false to Valentine, And now I must be as unjust to Thurio. Under the color of commending him, I have access my own love to prefer. To be corrupted with my worthless gifts. When I protest true loyalty to her, She twits me with my falsehood to my friend. When to her beauty I commend my vows, In breaking faith with Julia, whom I loved. And notwithstanding all her sudden quips, The least whereof would quell a lover’s hope, Yet, spaniel-like, the more she spurns my love, But here comes Thurio. Now must we to her window And give some evening music to her ear.","I’ve already had to lie to Valentine, and now I must be just as unfair to Thurio. Under the guise of praising him, I now have the ability to express my own feelings of love to Sylvia. But Sylvia is too beautiful, too faithful, too holy to be corrupted by my worthless praises. When I declare my loyalty to her, she criticizes me for being false to my friend, Valentine. When I praise her beauty, she tells me to think about how I’ve been unfaithful to Julia, whom I once loved. And yet, despite all of her scolding, the least of which could kill a lover’s hopes, my love grows and fawns on her like a dog the more she spurns it. But here comes Thurio. Now we must go to her window and play some evening music for her to hear."
"How now, Sir Proteus, are you crept before us?","How’s it going, Sir Proteus? Did you creep over here before us?"
"Ay, gentle Thurio, for you know that love","Yes, kind Thurio, because you know that love has to creep where it isn’t allowed to walk."
"Ay, but I hope, sir, that you love not here.","Yes, but I hope, sir, that you aren’t in love in this situation."
"Sir, but I do, or else I would be hence.","But I am, or else I wouldn’t be here."
Who? Sylvia?,Who are you in love with? Sylvia?
"Ay, Sylvia—for your sake.","Yes, Sylvia—for your sake."
"Let’s tune, and to it lustily awhile.","I thank you for your own sake. Now, gentlemen, let’s start playing, and be sure to give it all you’ve got."
"Now, my young guest, methinks you’re allycholly. I pray you, why is it?","Now, my young guest, it seems to me you feel melancholy. Please tell me, why is it?"
"Marry, mine Host, because I cannot be merry.","In fact, my host, it’s because I cannot be happy."
"Come, we’ll have you merry. I’ll bring you where you shall hear music and see the gentleman that you asked for.","Come, we’ll make you happy. I’ll take you where you shall hear music and see the gentleman that you asked for."
But shall I hear him speak?,But will I hear him speak?
"Ay, that you shall.","Yes, you will."
That will be music.,That’s music that I hear.
Hark! hark!,Listen! Listen!
Is he among these?,Is he among these musicians?
"Ay, but peace! Let’s hear ’em.","Yes, but be quiet! Let’s listen to them."
"Who is Sylvia? What is she, That all our swains commend her? Holy, fair, and wise is she; The heaven such grace did lend her, Is she kind as she is fair? For beauty lives with kindness. Love doth to her eyes repair To help him of his blindness, Then to Sylvia let us sing, That Sylvia is excelling. She excels each mortal thing Upon the dull earth dwelling.","Who is Sylvia? What is she like, That all our young men praise her? She is holy and fair and wise; And Heaven has lent her such grace So that she may be admired. Is she as kind as she is beautiful? Because beauty and kindness are joined. Cupid makes visits to her eyes To cure him of his blindness, And, being cured, he stays there to live. Then let us sing to Sylvia, That Sylvia is superior. She surpasses every mortal thing That lives on this dull earth. Let us bring her flower garlands."
"How now? Are you sadder than you were before? How do you, man? The music likes you not.","What’s this? Are you sadder than you were before? What’s going on, man? You don’t like the music?"
You mistake; the musician likes me not.,You’re mistaken. The musician doesn’t like me.
"Why, my pretty youth?","Why, my young friend?"
"He plays false, father.","He is being false, sir."
How? Out of tune on the strings?,How so? Are his instrument’s strings out of tune?
"Not so, but yet so false that he grieves my very heartstrings.","No, but he’s being so false that it hurts my very heartstrings."
You have a quick ear.,You have a good ear.
"Ay, I would I were deaf; it makes me have a slow heart.","Yes, but I wish I were deaf. It makes my heart sad."
I perceive you delight not in music.,I see you don’t enjoy listening to music.
"Not a whit, when it jars so.","Not at all, when it sounds so awful."
"Hark, what fine change is in the music!","Listen, how they change their tune!"
"Ay, that change is the spite.","Yes, that “change” is the problem."
You would have them always play but one thing?,Would you prefer that they always play just one thing?
"I would always have one play but one thing. But, Host, doth this Sir Proteus that we talk on often resort unto this gentlewoman?","I would always have one of them play only one song. But, host, does this Sir Proteus we’re talking about often go to this lady?"
"I tell you what Lance, his man, told me: he loved her out of all nick.","I’ll tell you what Lance, his servant, told me: he loved her more than anything."
Where is Lance?,Where is Lance?
"Gone to seek his dog, which tomorrow, by his master’s command, he must carry for a present to his lady.","Gone to find his dog, which he must deliver as a present to Sylvia tomorrow upon his master’s command."
Peace! Stand aside. The company parts.,Quiet! Step aside. The musicians are leaving.
"Sir Thurio, fear not you. I will so plead","Sir Thurio, don’t worry. I will plead to Sylvia so effectively that you’ll say my cunning scheme is excellent."
Where meet we?,Where will we meet?
At Saint Gregory’s well.,At Saint Gregory’s well.
Farewell.,Farewell.
"Madam, good even to your ladyship.","Madame, good evening to your ladyship."
Who is that that spake?,"I thank you for your music, sir. Who is that who spoke?"
"One, lady, if you knew his pure heart’s truth, You would quickly learn to know him by his voice.","Someone, lady, whom you would quickly learn to recognize by his voice if you knew how he truly felt."
"Sir Proteus, as I take it.","Sir Proteus, I take it."
"Sir Proteus, gentle lady, and your servant.","Sir Proteus, gentle lady, and also your servant."
What’s your will?,What do you want?
That I may compass yours.,For you to want me.
"You have your wish. My will is even this: That presently you hie you home to bed. Think’st thou I am so shallow, so conceitless, To be seducèd by thy flattery, That hast deceived so many with thy vows? Return, return, and make thy love amends. I am so far from granting thy request That I despise thee for thy wrongful suit, And by and by intend to chide myself Even for this time I spend in talking to thee.","Then you have your wish. I want this of you: that you take yourself home to bed. You sly, lying, false, disloyal man! Do you think I’m so shallow, so stupid, that you can seduce me with your flattery when you’ve deceived so many others with your vows? Go back, go back, and apologize to your love. I swear on the moon, I am so far from granting your request that I despise you for your misguided plea. In a moment I intend to scold myself for spending even this much time talking to you."
But she is dead.,"I admit, sweet love, that I did love a lady. But she is dead."
"[Aside] ’Twere false, if I should speak it, For I am sure she is not burièd.","(aside) That’s false, if I do say so myself, because I’m sure she’s not dead and buried."
"Say that she be, yet Valentine, thy friend, I am betrothed. And art thou not ashamed To wrong him with thy importunacy?","Even if she is dead, Valentine—your friend—is still alive, and you know that I’m betrothed to him. Aren’t you ashamed to wrong him with your disrespect?"
I likewise hear that Valentine is dead.,I also hear that Valentine is dead.
"And so suppose am I, for in his grave,","Then consider me dead, too, because you can be sure my love is buried with him in his grave."
"Sweet lady, let me rake it from the earth.","Sweet lady, let me dig up your love from the earth."
"Go to thy lady’s grave and call hers thence. Or, at the least, in hers sepulchre thine.",Go to your lady’s grave and dig up her love then. Or at least bury yours in her tomb.
[Aside] He heard not that.,(aside) He didn’t hear that.
"Vouchsafe me yet your picture for my love, The picture that is hanging in your chamber. To that I’ll speak, to that I’ll sigh and weep; For, since the substance of your perfect self And to your shadow will I make true love.","Madame, if your heart is so stubborn, at least indulge my love by giving me a portrait of yourself—the picture that is hanging in your bedroom. I’ll speak, sigh, and weep to that. Since you are completely devoted to someone else, I am nothing, and therefore I will love your image and not you."
"[Aside] If ’twere a substance, you would, sure, deceive it, And make it but a shadow, as I am.","(aside) If it were a real woman you would certainly deceive her and make her into nothing, just as I am nothing now."
"I am very loath to be your idol, sir. To worship shadows and adore false shapes, Send to me in the morning, and I’ll send it. And so, good rest.","I don’t want to be your idol, sir. But since it’s appropriate that your deceiving self should worship shadows and adore images rather than the real thing, send your servant to me in the morning, and I’ll send you the portrait. So go on, and good night."
As wretches have o’ernight,I’ll have as good a night as the condemned man who awaits execution in the morning.
"Host, will you go?","Host, are you leaving?"
"By my halidom, I was fast asleep.","My goodness, I was fast asleep."
"Pray you, where lies Sir Proteus?","Please, where is Sir Proteus staying?"
"Marry, at my house. Trust me, I think ’tis almost day.","Why, at my house. Oh my word, I think it’s almost dawn."
"That e’er I watched, and the most heaviest.","No, it isn’t. It’s been the longest night I’ve ever had, and the saddest."
"This is the hour that Madam Sylvia Entreated me to call and know her mind. There’s some great matter she’d employ me in. Madam, madam!",This is the time that Madame Sylvia asked me to come by so that she could tell me something. There’s an important matter she’d like my help with. Madame! Madame!
Who calls?,Who’s there?
Your servant and your friend; One that attends your ladyship’s command.,Your servant and your friend—one that is here to obey your ladyship’s orders.
"Sir Eglamour, a thousand times good morrow.","Sir Eglamour, good morning a thousand times over."
"As many, worthy lady, to yourself. I am thus early come to know what service It is your pleasure to command me in.","As many to you, my worthy lady. I’ve come as your ladyship asked and have arrived a little early to find out what you’d like me to do for you."
"O Eglamour, thou art a gentleman— Think not I flatter, for I swear I do not— Thou art not ignorant what dear good will I bear unto the banished Valentine, Nor how my father would enforce me marry Vain Thurio, whom my very soul abhors. No grief did ever come so near thy heart As when thy lady and thy true love died, Upon whose grave thou vowedst pure chastity. Sir Eglamour, I would to Valentine, And, for the ways are dangerous to pass, I do desire thy worthy company, Upon whose faith and honor I repose. Urge not my father’s anger, Eglamour, And on the justice of my flying hence To keep me from a most unholy match, Which heaven and fortune still rewards with plagues. I do desire thee, even from a heart To bear me company and go with me; If not, to hide what I have said to thee, That I may venture to depart alone.","Oh, Eglamour, you are a gentleman, valiant, wise, and very successful. Don’t think I’m trying to flatter you, because I swear I’m not. I’m sure you know how dearly I feel about the banished Valentine, and how my father wants to force me to marry that conceited Thurio, whom I hate down to my very soul. You’ve been in love before, and I’ve heard you say you’ve never experienced more grief than when your lady and true love died. You swore a vow of chastity on her grave. Sir Eglamour, I want to go to Valentine in Mantua, where I hear he is living. Because the journey there is a dangerous one, I’d like you to accompany me, as I trust in your faith and honor. Don’t use my father’s anger as an excuse, Eglamour, but think about my grief—a lady’s grief—and about why it’s fair that I run away to avoid this terrible marriage, the kind heaven always afflicts with problems. Even though my heart is as full of sorrow as the sea is full of sand, I want you to keep me company and go with me. If you don’t want to go, then please don’t reveal what I’ve said to you, so that I can leave without anyone knowing."
"Madam, I pity much your grievances, I give consent to go along with you, Recking as little what betideth me As much I wish all good befortune you. When will you go?","Madame, I pity you for your grievances. Since I know they are legitimate, I agree to go along with you. I’m not concerned what may happen to me, and I wish you the best of luck. When will you go?"
This evening coming.,This evening.
Where shall I meet you?,Where should I meet you?
"At Friar Patrick’s cell, Where I intend holy confession.","At Friar Patrick’s chambers, where I intend to take holy confession."
I will not fail your ladyship.,"I won’t fail you, your ladyship. Good day, gentle lady."
"Good morrow, kind Sir Eglamour.","Good day, kind Sir Eglamour."
"When a man’s servant shall play the cur with him, look you, it goes hard—one that I brought up of a puppy, one that I saved from drowning when three or four of his blind brothers and sisters went to it. I have taught him, even as one would say precisely, “Thus I would teach a dog.” I was sent to deliver him as a present to Mistress Sylvia from my master, and I came no sooner into the dining chamber, but he steps me to her trencher and steals her capon’s leg. O, ’tis a foul thing when a cur cannot keep himself in all companies! I would have, as one should say, one that takes upon him to be a dog indeed, to be, as it were, a dog at all things. If I had not had more wit than he, to take a fault upon me that he did, I think verily he had been hanged for ’t; sure as I live, he had suffered for ’t. You shall judge. He thrusts me himself into the company of three or four gentlemanlike dogs, under the Duke’s table. He had not been there—bless the mark!—a pissing while but all the chamber smelt him. “Out with the dog!” says one; “What cur is that?” says another. “Whip him out” says the third. “Hang him up” says the Duke. I, having been acquainted with the smell before, knew it was Crab, and goes me to the fellow that whips the dogs. “Friend,” quoth I “you mean to whip the dog?” “Ay, marry do I,” quoth he. “You do him the more wrong,” quoth I; “’twas I did the thing you wot of.” He makes me no more ado, but whips me out of the chamber. How many masters would do this for his servant? Nay, I’ll be sworn I have sat in the stocks for puddings he hath stolen, otherwise he had been executed. I have stood on the pillory for geese he hath killed, otherwise he had suffered for ’t.—Thou think’st not of this now. Nay, I remember the trick you served me when I took my leave of Madam Sylvia. Did not I bid thee still mark me and do as I do? When didst thou see me heave up my leg and make water against a gentlewoman’s farthingale? Didst thou ever see me do such a trick?","When a man’s pet behaves like a stupid mongrel, mind you, it’s hard to take—a dog that I brought up from a puppy, one that I saved from drowning when three or four of his newborn brothers and sisters were drowned. I have trained him quite literally “as I would teach a dog,” as the saying goes. I was sent to deliver him as a present to Mistress Sylvia from my master, but no sooner had I stepped into the dining room than he ran ahead of me to the plate and stole her drumstick. Oh, it is a foul thing when a mongrel can’t behave himself in front of company! It seems I have a dog that tries to be a dog indeed—dog-gone good at all things, as one would say. If I hadn’t had the brains to take the blame for what he’d done, I honestly think he would have been hanged for it. As sure as I’m alive he would have been punished for it. You be the judge. He thrusts himself under the duke’s table and into the company of three or four fancier dogs. He hadn’t been there a second or two before everyone in the whole room could smell his piss—pardon my French! “Out with the dog!” says one person; “What mangy mutt is that?” asks another. “Whip him,” says a third. “Hang him!” says the duke. I, having smelled that smell before, knew it was Crab, so I went to the fellow whose job it is to whip the dogs. “Friend,” I said, “are you going to whip the dog?” “Yes, in fact, I am,” he replied. “Then you’re doing him a great injustice,” I answered back, “because it was I who peed all over the place.” He didn’t say anything else but just whipped me out of the room. How many masters would do this for their pets? No, I swear I’ve sat in the stocks for meat pies he has stolen—otherwise he would have been executed. I have stood on the pillory for geese he has killed—otherwise he would have suffered the consequences. You don’t remember any of this now, do you, Crab? No, I remember the trick you pulled on me when I said goodbye to Madame Sylvia. Didn’t I tell you that you should still obey me and do as I do? When did you ever see me lift up my leg and urinate on a noble woman’s undergarments? Did you ever see me do such a thing?"
"[To JULIA] Sebastian is thy name? I like thee well, And will employ thee in some service presently.","(to Julia) Your name is Sebastian, right? I like you, and I’d like to hire you for a job I need done."
In what you please. I’ll do what I can.,Name it. I’ll do what I can.
I hope thou wilt.,I hope you will.
"How now, you whoreson peasant, Where have you been these two days loitering?","How’s it going, you poor son of a bitch? Where have you been hanging around these past two days?"
"Marry, sir, I carried Mistress Sylvia the dog you bade me.","Well, sir, I brought the dog to Mistress Sylvia, as you instructed."
And what says she to my little jewel?,What did she say about my little jewel of a gift?
"Marry, she says your dog was a cur, and tells you currish thanks is good enough for such a present.","Actually, she said your dog was a mongrel and said that a shabby thanks is good enough for such a present."
But she received my dog?,But she accepted my dog?
"No, indeed, did she not. Here have I brought him back again.","No, indeed, she didn’t. Here, I’ve brought him back again."
"What, didst thou offer her this from me?","What, did you offer her this mutt from me?"
"Ay, sir: the other squirrel was stolen from me by the hangman boys in the marketplace, and then I offered her mine own, who is a dog as big as ten of yours, and therefore the gift the greater.","Yes, sir. The other runt was stolen from me by a gang of boys in the marketplace. So, I offered her my own, which is a bigger dog than ten of your little dogs, and so a better gift."
"Or ne’er return again into my sight. Away, I say! Stayest thou to vex me here?","Go on and get out of here, and find my dog again, or never let me see you again. Away, I say! Are you staying here to make me angry?"
"A slave, that still an end turns me to shame!— Sebastian, I have entertainèd thee, That can with some discretion do my business, For ’tis no trusting to yond foolish lout, But chiefly for thy face and thy behavior, Which, if my augury deceive me not, Therefore know thou, for this I entertain thee. Go presently, and take this ring with thee.","What a scoundrel, who never fails to disgrace me! Sebastian, I’ve hired you partly because I have need of a young man who can take care of some business for me quietly, and there’s no trusting that foolish lout Lance. But I’ve chiefly hired you for the way you look and act, which if my intuition doesn’t deceive me mean you are honest, lucky, and have been brought up well. Know that this is why I hired you. Now go, and take this ring with you."
Deliver it to Madam Sylvia— She loved me well delivered it to me.,The woman who gave it to me loved me very much. Deliver it to Madame Sylvia.
"She’s dead, belike?",It seems you didn’t love her if you’re giving away her gift. Is she dead?
Not so. I think she lives.,No. I think she’s alive.
Alas!,Oh no!
Why dost thou cry “Alas”?,Why do you cry “Oh no!”?
I cannot choose but pity her.,I can’t help but feel sorry for her.
Wherefore shouldst thou pity her?,Why would you feel sorry for her?
Because methinks that she loved you as well As you do love your lady Sylvia. She dreams on him that has forgot her love; ’Tis pity love should be so contrary; And thinking on it makes me cry “alas!”,"Because I suspect she loved you as much as you love your lady Sylvia. She dreams of that man who has forgotten her love. You dote on a woman who doesn’t care for your love. It’s a pity love is so difficult, and thinking about it makes me cry “Oh no!”"
"Well, give her that ring and therewithal This letter. [Giving a letter] That’s her chamber. Tell my lady Your message done, hie home unto my chamber, Where thou shalt find me, sad and solitary.","Well, give her that ring and with it this letter. (giving a letter) That’s her room. Tell her I want the heavenly picture she promised me. When you’ve finished delivering the message, return home to my room, where you’ll find me sad and alone."
"How many women would do such a message? Alas, poor Proteus! thou hast entertained Alas, poor fool, why do I pity him That with his very heart despiseth me? Because he loves her, he despiseth me; Because I love him, I must pity him. To bind him to remember my good will; And now am I, unhappy messenger, To plead for that which I would not obtain, To carry that which I would have refused, I am my master’s true-confirmèd love, But cannot be true servant to my master Unless I prove false traitor to myself. Yet will I woo for him, but yet so coldly","How many women would deliver such a message? Too bad, poor Proteus! You’ve hired a fox to be the shepherd of your lambs. Why, poor fool that I am, do I pity the man who despises me? He despises me because he loves her, and I feel sorry for him because I love him. This is the ring I gave him when he left, and it was to remind him always of my feelings. And now I’m an unhappy messenger who is supposed to ask for the picture I don’t want him to have, to deliver the ring I want Sylvia to refuse, and to praise his loyalty, which I want to disparage. I am my master’s true love, but I can’t be a loyal servant to my master without being a traitor to myself. Still I’ll woo Sylvia for him, but heaven knows I’ll do it coldly, because I don’t want him to win her."
"Gentlewoman, good day! I pray you be my means To bring me where to speak with Madam Sylvia.","Gentlewoman, good day! Would you please take me to Madame Sylvia so that I may speak with her?"
"What would you with her, if that I be she?","What do you want with her, assuming I am she?"
"If you be she, I do entreat your patience","If you are she, I ask your patience to hear me deliver the message I’ve been instructed to bring you."
From whom?,From whom?
"From my master, Sir Proteus, madam.","From my master, Sir Proteus, madam."
"O, he sends you for a picture?","Oh, did he send you for a picture of me?"
"Ay, madam.","Yes, madame."
"Ursula, bring my picture there.","Ursula, bring my picture there."
"Go, give your master this. Tell him from me, One Julia, that his changing thoughts forget, Would better fit his chamber than this shadow.","Go, give your master this. Tell him from me that a woman named Julia, whom his fickle heart has forgotten, would be more appropriate for his bedroom than this image of me."
"Madam, please you peruse this letter.—","Madame, please read this letter."
Delivered you a paper that I should not.,"Pardon me, madame—I accidentally gave you a paper I shouldn’t have."
This is the letter to your ladyship.,This is the letter for your ladyship.
"I pray thee, let me look on that again.","Please, let me look at that other letter again."
"It may not be. Good madam, pardon me.","I can’t do that. Forgive me, good madam."
"I will not look upon your master’s lines. I know they are stuffed with protestations And full of newfound oaths, which he will break As easily as I do tear his paper.","Wait, stop! I will not look at your master’s letter. I know it is filled with vows and full of newly made oaths, which he will break as easily as I tear up his letter."
"[Offering the ring] Madam, he sends your ladyship this ring.","(offering the ring) Madame, he sends your ladyship this ring."
"The more shame for him that he sends it me, For I have heard him say a thousand times His Julia gave it him at his departure. Though his false finger have profaned the ring,","He should be even more ashamed for sending it to me, since I have heard him say a thousand times that his love Julia gave it to him when he departed. Even though his deceitful finger has sullied the ring, my finger will not mistreat Julia so much."
She thanks you.,She thanks you.
What sayst thou?,What did you say?
"I thank you, madam, that you tender her. Poor gentlewoman! My master wrongs her much.","I thank you, madam, that you consider her feelings. Poor gentlewoman! My master mistreats her very much."
Dost thou know her?,Do you know her?
Almost as well as I do know myself. To think upon her woes I do protest That I have wept a hundred several times.,Almost as well as I know myself. I swear I’ve wept several hundred times thinking about her sorrows.
Belike she thinks that Proteus hath forsook her.,She probably thinks that Proteus has rejected her.
"I think she doth, and that’s her cause of sorrow.","I think she does, and that’s the cause of her sorrow."
Is she not passing fair?,Isn’t she very beautiful?
"She hath been fairer, madam, than she is. When she did think my master loved her well, She, in my judgment, was as fair as you; And threw her sun-expelling mask away, The air hath starved the roses in her cheeks And pinched the lily tincture of her face, That now she is become as black as I.","She has been more beautiful, madam, than she is now. When she thought my master loved her deeply, she was as beautiful as you, in my opinion. But since she no longer takes care of her appearance and has thrown her sunblocking mask A mask worn by women to keep the sun off their faces. sunblocking mask away, the air has taken the rosiness from her cheeks and stolen the whiteness from her face, so that now she is as ugly as I am."
How tall was she?,How tall was she?
"About my stature; for at Pentecost, When all our pageants of delight were played, Our youth got me to play the woman’s part, And I was trimmed in Madam Julia’s gown, As if the garment had been made for me: Therefore I know she is about my height. And at that time I made her weep agood, For I did play a lamentable part: For Theseus’ perjury and unjust flight; Which I so lively acted with my tears That my poor mistress, movèd therewithal, Wept bitterly; and would I might be dead","About my height. When we put on a pageant at Pentecost A religious holiday period that followed seven weeks after Easter. Pentecost , the young men got me to play the part of a woman, and I was dressed in Madam Julia’s gown, which everyone said fit me very well, as if the garment had been made for me. Therefore, I know she is about my height. And at the time I made her cry a lot, because I played a really sad part—I was Ariadne In Greek myth, Ariadne fell in love with Theseus and promised to help him find his way out of the Minotaur’s labrynth if he would take her to Athens and marry her. But on the way, Theseus abandoned her, either accidentally or deliberately depending on the account. Ariadne , Madame, suffering from Theseus’ lies and unfair departure. I acted the part so convincingly with my tears that poor Julia, moved with the performance, wept bitterly. I would wish I were dead if I didn’t feel her very sorrow!"
"She is beholding to thee, gentle youth. Alas, poor lady, desolate and left! I weep myself, to think upon thy words. Here, youth, there is my purse.","She is indebted to you, young man. Such a shame—the poor lady, desolate and abandoned! I weep myself just hearing your story. Here, young man, there is my purse."
"For thy sweet mistress’ sake, because thou lov’st her. Farewell.","I give this to you for your sweet mistresses’ sake, because you love her. Farewell."
"And she shall thank you for ’t, if e’er you know her.— A virtuous gentlewoman, mild and beautiful! Since she respects my mistress’ love so much. Alas, how love can trifle with itself! Here is her picture.","And she will thank you for it, if you ever meet her. A virtuous gentlewoman, kind and beautiful! I hope my master’s endeavors to win her love will fail since she respects the love I feel for him so much. It’s too bad how love can fool itself! Here is her picture."
"Let me see, I think Were full as lovely as is this of hers; And yet the painter flattered her a little, Unless I flatter with myself too much. Her hair is auburn, mine is perfect yellow; I’ll get me such a colored periwig. Her eyes are grey as glass, and so are mine. Ay, but her forehead’s low, and mine’s as high. What should it be that he respects in her If this fond Love were not a blinded god? Come, shadow, come, and take this shadow up, For ’tis thy rival.","Let me see, I think if I had a similar headdress my face would be as lovely as hers. And yet the painter made her prettier than she is, unless I flatter myself too much in thinking I’m as pretty. Her hair is auburn, while mine is perfect yellow. If that’s the only thing he likes better about her, then I’ll get myself a blond wig. Her eyes are as gray as glass, and so are mine. Yes, but her forehead’s low, and mine is as high as hers is low. If Love is really blind, what does he value in her that I can’t make him value in myself? Let’s go, Sebastian. Let’s go and get rid of this picture, since it’s your rival."
"O thou senseless form, And, were there sense in his idolatry, My substance should be statue in thy stead. I’ll use thee kindly for thy mistress’ sake, That used me so; or else, by Jove I vow, To make my master out of love with thee!","Oh you unfeeling image, you’ll be worshipped, kissed, loved, and adored! Were there any sense in his worship, it would be the real me he worships instead. I’ll treat this picture kindly for the sake of its mistress, who treated me so well. Otherwise, by Jove, I would have scratched out your unseeing eyes to make my master fall out of love with you!"
"The sun begins to gild the western sky, And now it is about the very hour That Sylvia at Friar Patrick’s cell should meet me. She will not fail, for lovers break not hours So much they spur their expedition.","The setting sun begins to color the western sky, and now it’s almost the time that Sylvia is supposed to meet me at Friar Patrick’s chamber. She will not fail, because those who are in love are always on time, unless they arrive early to speed up their progress."
"See, where she comes.—Lady, a happy evening!","See, here she comes now. Good evening, my lady!"
"Amen, amen! Go on, good Eglamour, Out at the postern by the abbey wall.","Thank God, thank God! Go on, my good Eglamour. Go out to the back door by the abbey wall. I’m afraid some spies have followed me."
"Fear not. The forest is not three leagues off. If we recover that, we are sure enough.","Don’t worry. The forest is less than nine miles away. If we make it there, we are safe."
"Sir Proteus, what says Sylvia to my suit?","Sir Proteus, what does Sylvia have to say about my declarations of love for her?"
"O, sir, I find her milder than she was, And yet she takes exceptions at your person.","Oh, sir, she’s not as cold as she used to be, though she still objects to you."
"What, that my leg is too long?","What, because my leg is too long?"
"No, that it is too little.","No, because it’s too skinny."
"I’ll wear a boot, to make it somewhat rounder.","I’ll wear a boot with spurs, then, to make it look thicker."
[Aside] But love will not be spurred to what it loathes.,(aside) But love can’t be spurred to like what it hates.
What says she to my face?,What does she have to say about my face?
She says it is a fair one.,She says it is an attractive one.
"Nay, then, the wanton lies; my face is black.","No, then, she’s lying—my face is ugly."
"But pearls are fair, and the old saying is, Black men are pearls in beauteous ladies’ eyes.","But pearls are beautiful, and the old saying is that ugly men are pearls in beautiful women’s eyes."
"[Aside] ’Tis true, such pearls as put out ladies’ eyes, For I had rather wink than look on them.","(aside) It’s true—the kind of pearls that make ladies go blind Meaning cataracts, a condition in which the lens of the eye grows opaque and white, blurring vision and making the eye somewhat resemble a pearl. pearls that make ladies go blind . I’d rather shut my eyes than look at them."
How likes she my discourse?,How does she like my conversation?
"Ill, when you talk of war.","Not much, when you talk about war."
But well when I discourse of love and peace?,But she likes it when I talk about love and peace?
"[Aside] But better, indeed, when you hold your peace.",(aside) But even better when you hold your peace and don’t talk at all.
What says she to my valor?,What does she have to say about my bravery?
"O, sir, she makes no doubt of that.","Oh, sir, she doesn’t question it at all."
"[Aside] She needs not, when she knows it cowardice.","(aside) She doesn’t need to, since she knows he’s a coward."
What says she to my birth?,What does she have to say about my lineage?
That you are well derived.,That you are of good descent.
[Aside] True; from a gentleman to a fool.,(aside) True—he’s descended from a gentleman to a fool.
Considers she my possessions?,Has she thought about all the lands that I own?
"O, ay, and pities them.","Oh, yes, and she pities them."
Wherefore?,Why?
[Aside] That such an ass should owe them.,(aside) Because an ass like him owns them.
That they are out by lease.,Because you’ve leased them to others.
Here comes the Duke.,Here comes the duke.
"How now, Sir Proteus? how now, Thurio? Which of you saw Sir Eglamour of late?","How are you, Sir Proteus? How are you, Thurio? Has either of you seen Eglamour lately?"
Not I.,I haven’t.
Nor I.,Nor have I.
Saw you my daughter?,Have you seen my daughter?
Neither.,I haven’t seen her either.
"Why then, She’s fled unto that peasant Valentine, And Eglamour is in her company. As he in penance wandered through the forest. Him he knew well, and guessed that it was she, But, being masked, he was not sure of it. Besides, she did intend confession These likelihoods confirm her flight from hence. Therefore, I pray you, stand not to discourse, But mount you presently, and meet with me Upon the rising of the mountain foot Dispatch, sweet gentlemen, and follow me.","That means she’s run off to that rascal Valentine, and Eglamour is with her. I know it’s true, because Friar Lawrence met them both as he wandered through the forest in penance. He knew Eglamour well and guessed that the girl was Sylvia, but he wasn’t sure since she had a mask on. Besides, she’d planned to take confession at Friar Patrick’s chamber tonight, but she didn’t show up. These coincidences confirm that she’s run away. Therefore, I beg you, stop talking and mount your horses immediately. Meet me on the rise at the foot of the mountain that leads toward Mantua, where they fled to. Hurry, kind gentlemen, and follow me."
"Why, this it is to be a peevish girl, That flies her fortune when it follows her. I’ll after, more to be revenged on Eglamour","Why, what a silly girl she is to throw away everything good that was coming to her. I’ll follow them, more to get revenge on Eglamour than out of love for reckless Sylvia."
"And I will follow, more for Sylvia’s love Than hate of Eglamour that goes with her.","And I’ll follow, too, more out of love for Sylvia than hatred of Elgamour, who goes with her."
"And I will follow, more to cross that love Than hate for Sylvia, that is gone for love.","And I will follow as well, more to thwart Proteus’s love for Sylvia than out of any hatred of Sylvia, who flees because of love."
"Come, come, Be patient. We must bring you to our captain.","Come on, come on. Be patient. We must bring you to our captain."
A thousand more mischances than this one Have learned me how to brook this patiently.,A thousand misfortunes worse than this one have taught me how to endure this patiently.
"Come, bring her away.","Go on, take her away."
Where is the gentleman that was with her?,Where is the gentleman that was with her Meaning Eglamour. the gentleman that was with her ?
"Being nimble-footed, he hath outrun us, But Moses and Valerius follow him. Go thou with her to the west end of the wood; The thicket is beset; he cannot scape.","He was fast so he outran us, but Moses and Valerius are following him. Go with her to the west end of the woods. Our captain is there. We’ll follow the guy who fled. The woods are surrounded by our men—he cannot escape."
"Come, I must bring you to our captain’s cave. Fear not; he bears an honorable mind And will not use a woman lawlessly.","Come on, I must take you to our captain’s cave. Don’t be afraid. He is an honorable man and will not rape you."
"O Valentine, this I endure for thee!","Oh, Valentine, I endure all this for you!"
"How use doth breed a habit in a man! This shadowy desert, unfrequented woods, I better brook than flourishing peopled towns. Here can I sit alone, unseen of any, Tune my distresses and record my woes. O thou that dost inhabit in my breast, Leave not the mansion so long tenantless, Lest, growing ruinous, the building fall Repair me with thy presence, Sylvia; Thou gentle nymph, cherish thy forlorn swain!","Repetition can make a man accustomed to anything! This shadowy deserted place, these woods that are rarely visited—I can take them better than bustling towns with lots of people. Here I can sit alone without anyone seeing me, and accompanied by the nightingale’s sad song I can sing about my worries and list all my troubles. Oh you, Sylvia, who lives in my heart, don’t leave your home empty for long, or rotting from within, the entire building falls and leaves no trace of what it was! Heal me with your presence, Sylvia. Gentle nymph, cherish your sad lover!"
"What halloing and what stir is this to-day? These are my mates, that make their wills their law, They love me well, yet I have much to do To keep them from uncivil outrages. Withdraw thee, Valentine. Who’s this comes here?","What’s all this shouting and commotion I hear? Those are my friends, the outlaws who do whatever they like, who are chasing some unfortunate traveler. They like me enough, but I have to work hard to keep them from violent crimes. Hide yourself, Valentine. Who is this that comes here?"
"Madam, this service I have done for you— To hazard life and rescue you from him That would have forced your honor and your love. Vouchsafe me, for my meed, but one fair look; A smaller boon than this I cannot beg,","Madame, I’ve helped you—even though you don’t value what I do—and risked my life to rescue you from that man who would have raped you. For my reward, give me just one kind look. I can’t beg for a smaller favor than this, and I’m sure that you can’t give anything less than this."
"[Aside] How like a dream is this I see and hear! Love, lend me patience to forbear awhile.","(aside) What I see and hear is like a dream! Love, give me strength to be patient just a little while longer."
"O miserable, unhappy that I am!","Oh, what a miserable, unhappy woman I am!"
"Unhappy were you, madam, ere I came;","You were unhappy, madam, before I came. But in coming I’ve made you happy."
By thy approach thou mak’st me most unhappy.,Your advances make me very unhappy.
"[Aside] And me, when he approacheth to your presence.",(aside) And makes me unhappy when he flirts with you.
"Had I been seizèd by a hungry lion, I would have been a breakfast to the beast O, heaven be judge how I love Valentine, Whose life’s as tender to me as my soul! And full as much—for more there cannot be— I do detest false, perjured Proteus.","If a hungry lion had seized me, I would rather have been eaten by the beast than have treacherous Proteus rescue me. Oh, heaven knows how I love Valentine, whose life is as precious to me as my own soul! And with just as much feeling—for I couldn’t feel any more strongly—I hate the lying, deceitful Proteus. So get out of here, and stop trying to win me."
"What dangerous action, stood it next to death, Would I not undergo for one calm look? O, ’tis the curse in love, and still approved, When women cannot love where they’re beloved!","What dangerous action, even if it put me at risk of death, would I not undertake for just one gentle look from you? Oh, it is the curse of love, and it is always the case that women never love those who love them!"
"Read over Julia’s heart, thy first, best love, For whose dear sake thou didst then rend thy faith Into a thousand oaths, and all those oaths Descended into perjury, to love me. And that’s far worse than none. Better have none Than plural faith, which is too much by one. Thou counterfeit to thy true friend!","You mean Proteus never loves those who love him. Think of Julia’s feelings for you. She was your first, best love, and for her sake you swore your fidelity a thousand times. Now those oaths of faithfulness have sunk into lies, so that you can love me. You have no loyalty left now, unless you were to love two women, and that’s far worse than loving no one. Better not love at all than love two women, which is too many by one. You deceiver of your true friend!"
"In love,",Who honors their friendships when it comes to love?
All men but Proteus.,"All men but you, Proteus."
"Nay, if the gentle spirit of moving words Can no way change you to a milder form, I’ll woo you like a soldier, at arms’ end,","No, if the gentle spirit of heartfelt words can’t persuade you to think kindly of me, then I’ll woo you at knifepoint like a soldier and make love to you in a manner contrary to the nature of love—by raping you."
O heaven!,"Oh, heaven!"
[Assailing her] I’ll force thee yield to my desire.,(Proteus assaults her.) I’ll force you to yield to my desire.
"[Coming forward] Ruffian, let go that rude uncivil touch, Thou friend of an ill fashion!","(Valentine comes out of hiding.) Scoundrel, keep your savage hands off her, you foul friend!"
Valentine!,Valentine!
"Thou common friend, that’s without faith or love! For such is a friend now. Treacherous man, Thou hast beguiled my hopes. Naught but mine eye Could have persuaded me. Now I dare not say Who should be trusted, when one’s right hand Is perjured to the bosom? Proteus, I am sorry I must never trust thee more, But count the world a stranger for thy sake. ’Mongst all foes that a friend should be the worst!","You lying friend, without loyalty or love! That’s what you are now. Treacherous man, you tricked me with my hopes. Nothing could have persuaded me of what you really are but seeing it with my eyes. Now I won’t even say I have one friend alive—if I did, you’d prove me wrong. Who can you trust when your closest friend is false down to his core? Proteus, I’m sorry I must never trust you again, and because of you I’ll never think again that I know the world. Personal treachery makes the deepest wounds. Curse the day when a friend is the worst of all your enemies!"
"My shame and guilt confounds me. Forgive me, Valentine. If hearty sorrow Be a sufficient ransom for offence, As e’er I did commit.","Shame and guilt overwhelm me. Forgive me, Valentine. If heartfelt sadness is enough punishment for what I’ve done, then I offer it to you here. I feel truly miserable for everything I’ve done."
"Then I am paid, And once again I do receive thee honest. Who by repentance is not satisfied By penitence the Eternal’s wrath’s appeased; And, that my love may appear plain and free, All that was mine in Sylvia I give thee.","Then you’ve paid your debt to me, and I consider you to be honest once again. Whoever isn’t satisfied by such heartfelt repentence is neither from heaven nor earth, for repentance is enough to please both. God’s wrath comes in the form of penitence. And, so that you know my love for you is honest and free, I give you any claim I had to Sylvia."
O me unhappy!,"Oh, unhappy me!"
Look to the boy.,Look at the boy!
"Why, boy! Why, wag! How now? What’s the matter? Look up. Speak.","Hey, boy! Hey, kid! Are you okay? What’s the matter? Open your eyes. Say something."
"[Recovering] O good sir, my master charged me to deliver a ring to Madam Sylvia, which, out of my neglect, was never done.","(recovering) Oh, good sir, my master ordered me to deliver a ring to Madam Sylvia, which, out of neglect on my part, I never did."
"Where is that ring, boy?","Where is that ring, boy?"
[Giving her own ring] Here ’tis. This is it.,(giving her own ring) Here it is. This is it.
"Why, this is the ring I gave to Julia.","How? Let me see that. Why, this is the ring I gave to Julia."
"O, cry you mercy, sir, I have mistook. This is the ring you sent to Sylvia.","Oh, please forgive me, sir, I’ve made a mistake. This is the ring you sent to Sylvia."
But how cam’st thou by this ring?,But how did you get this ring? I gave it to Julia when I departed from Verona.
And Julia herself did give it me; And Julia herself have brought it hither.,And Julia herself gave it to me. And Julia herself has brought it here.
How? Julia?,What? Julia?
"Behold her that gave aim to all thy oaths How oft hast thou with perjury cleft the root! O Proteus, let this habit make thee blush! Be thou ashamed that I have took upon me Such an immodest raiment, if shame live It is the lesser blot, modesty finds, Women to change their shapes than men their minds.","It’s me, the woman who was the object of all your oaths and believed them deeply in her heart. Your lies have often cut me to the core! Oh, Proteus, I hope my appearance makes you blush! You should be ashamed that I have put on such an immodest outfit, if shame can live in someone who fakes love. Modesty says it’s better for women to transform their appearances than for men to change their minds."
"Than men their minds! ’Tis true. O heaven! Were man But constant, he were perfect. That one error Inconstancy falls off ere it begins. What is in Sylvia’s face but I may spy More fresh in Julia’s with a constant eye?","Than for men to change their minds! It’s true. Oh, God! Were men more constant and less fickle, he would be perfect. That one error leads to numerous faults and makes him commit all the deadly sins. The fickle man begins deceiving before he even tries to be constant. What does Sylvia have that I wouldn’t see to be even better in Julia if I were faithful?"
"Come, come, a hand from either. ’Twere pity two such friends should be long foes.","Come, come on, each of you give me a hand. Let me be blessed to bring this to a happy end. It would be a pity if two such good friends as you were enemies forever."
"Bear witness, heaven, I have my wish forever.","As God as my witness, I have what I want forever."
And I mine.,And I as well.
"A prize, a prize, a prize!",A prize! A prize! A prize!
"Forbear, forbear, I say! it is my lord the Duke.","Stop, stop, I say! This is my lord, the duke. They release the Duke and Thurio."
"Your Grace is welcome to a man disgraced, Banishèd Valentine.","I welcome you, Your Grace, as a disgraced man, banished Valentine."
Sir Valentine!,Sir Valentine!
"[Advancing] Yonder is Sylvia, and Sylvia’s mine.","(advancing) Sylvia is over there, and she’s mine."
"Come not within the measure of my wrath. Do not name Sylvia thine; if once again, Verona shall not hold thee. Here she stands. Take but possession of her with a touch;","(drawing his sword) Thurio, move back, or else be prepared to die. Don’t come within a step of my anger. Do not call Sylvia yours. If you do it again, you’ll never be welcome in Verona. Go ahead, try to even touch her. I dare you to even breathe upon my love."
"Sir Valentine, I care not for her, I. I hold him but a fool that will endanger His body for a girl that loves him not. I claim her not, and therefore she is thine.","Sir Valentine, I don’t care about her. I consider anyone a fool who will endanger his life for a girl who doesn’t love him. I don’t claim her, and therefore she is yours."
"To make such means for her as thou hast done And leave her on such slight conditions. Now, by the honor of my ancestry, I do applaud thy spirit, Valentine, Know then, I here forget all former griefs, Cancel all grudge, repeal thee home again, Plead a new state in thy unrivalled merit, To which I thus subscribe: Sir Valentine, Take thou thy Sylvia, for thou hast deserved her.","Then you are even more degenerate and awful, having made such great efforts to win her as you have and now leaving her for such minor reasons. Now, by the honor of my ancestors, I applaud your spirit, Valentine, and think you worthy of an empress’ love. I disregard all my former grievances with you, cancel all grudges, welcome you home again, and give you a clean record because of your unrivaled excellence, which I bear witness to. Sir Valentine, you are a gentleman and well-born. Take your Sylvia, for you have earned her."
"I thank Your Grace. The gift hath made me happy. I now beseech you, for your daughter’s sake, To grant one boon that I shall ask of you.","I thank Your Grace. Your gift has made me happy. Now I beg you, for your daughter’s sake, to grant one favor that I’ll ask of you."
"I grant it for thine own, whate’er it be.","I grant it for your own sake, whatever it may be."
"These banished men, that I have kept withal, Are men endued with worthy qualities. Forgive them what they have committed here, And let them be recalled from their exile. And fit for great employment, worthy lord.","These banished men, whom I have lived with, are men with good qualities. Forgive the crimes they’ve committed here, and declare an end to their exile. They are reformed, peaceful, goodhearted, and fit for great work, worthy lord."
"Thou hast prevailed; I pardon them and thee. Dispose of them as thou know’st their deserts. Come, let us go. We will include all jars","You win: I pardon them and you. I’ll leave you in charge of them, since you know what they deserve. Come, let’s go. We’ll put all quarrels behind us with pageants, happiness, and festivities."
"And, as we walk along, I dare be bold With our discourse to make Your Grace to smile. What think you of this page, my lord?","And, as we walk along, I’d like to be so bold as to tell you something to make Your Grace smile. What do you think of this young servant boy, my lord?"
I think the boy hath grace in him. He blushes.,"I think the boy has a feminine charm. Look, he’s blushing."
"I warrant you, my lord, more grace than boy.","I tell you, my lord, there’s more feminine charm in him than boy."
What mean you by that saying?,What do you mean by that?
"Please you, I’ll tell you as we pass along, That you will wonder what hath fortunèd.— Come, Proteus, ’tis your penance but to hear That done, our day of marriage shall be yours: One feast, one house, one mutual happiness.","If it please you, I’ll tell you on the way, and you’ll be amazed at what’s been going on. Come, Proteus, it’s your punishment to hear the story of your two loves revealed. When that’s done, our wedding day will also be yours: one feast, one house, and one mutual happiness."
