"If you shall chance, Camillo, to visit Bohemia, on the like occasion whereon my services are now on foot, you shall see, as I have said, great difference betwixt our Bohemia and your Sicilia.","Camillo, if you ever happen to accompany your King to Bohemia, as I am accompanying mine to Sicilia, you’ll see there’s a great difference between our countries—and our masters."
means to pay Bohemia the visitation which he justly owes him.,I think the King of Sicilia plans to visit the King of Bohemia this coming summer.
Wherein our entertainment shall shame us we will be justified in our loves; for indeed—,"If our hospitality is inadequate, we’ll make up for it with our love for you; in fact—"
"Beseech you,—",Please—
"we cannot with such magnificence—in so rare—I know not what to say. We will give you sleepy drinks, that your senses, unintelligent of our insufficience, may, though they cannot praise us, as little accuse","Truly, I say it from experience. We can’t match the magnificence, the excellence—I don’t even know how to describe it. We’ll give you drinks to dull your senses, so that you won’t be aware of our inadequacies, and even if you will be too sleepy to praise us, you won’t be able to accuse us of negligence, either."
You pay a great deal too dear for what’s given freely.,You are putting too great a value on something that is given for free.
"Believe me, I speak as my understanding instructs me and as mine honesty puts it to utterance.","Believe me, I say what my knowledge tells me, and I say it honestly."
"Sicilia cannot show himself over-kind to Bohemia. there rooted betwixt them then such an affection, which cannot choose but branch now. Since their more mature dignities and royal necessities made separation of their society, their encounters, with interchange of gifts, letters, loving embassies; that they have seemed to be together, though absent, shook hands, as over a vast, and embraced, as it were, from the ends of opposed","The King of Sicily could never be anything but kind to the King of Bohemia. They were brought up together as children, and so they have a deep-rooted affection for one another that can only grow. Because of their adult responsibilities and their duties as kings, they have not been able to meet personally. Instead their meetings have taken place via royal deputies and through the exchange of presents, letters, and fond words. Through these means they’ve stayed in touch despite the great distance between them. May the heavens keep their friendship strong!"
I think there is not in the world either malice or matter to alter it. You have an unspeakable comfort of your young prince Mamillius: it is a gentleman of the greatest promise that ever came,I don’t think there is anything in the world that can shake their friendship. And you have an indescribable comfort in the young prince Mamillius. He has the greatest potential of any young gentleman I’ve ever seen.
"I very well agree with you in the hopes of him: it is a gallant child; one that indeed physics the subject, makes old hearts fresh: they that went on crutches ere he was born desire yet their life to","I agree with you regarding his potential. He is a noble child, and he is like a medicine for his subjects. The old feel young, and those who were crippled even before he was born now hope to live long enough to see him grow into a man."
Would they else be content to die?,Would they otherwise want to die?
Yes; if there were no other excuse why they should desire to live.,"Yes, if they didn’t have any other reason for them to want to live."
"If the king had no son, they would desire to live","If the king didn’t have a son, they would want to live as cripples until he had one."
"Nine changes of the watery star hath been The shepherd’s note since we have left our throne Without a burthen: time as long again Would be filled up, my brother, with our thanks; Go hence in debt: and therefore, like a cipher, Yet standing in rich place, I multiply With one ‘We thank you’ many thousands more That go before it.","It has been nine months since I left my throne. I could happily spend another nine months away, but I must leave now, forever in your debt. So, like a zero, which means “nothing” but adds value when placed beside a number For instance, placing a zero next to makes it . adds value when placed beside a number , my one “thank you” will multiply the thousand more I’ve already said."
And pay them when you part.,Don’t thank me yet. Wait until you leave.
"Sir, that’s to-morrow. I am question’d by my fears, of what may chance Or breed upon our absence; that may blow ‘This is put forth too truly:’ besides, I have stay’d To tire your royalty.","Sir, I leave tomorrow. I’m fearful of what might happen by chance, or what plot may develop, because of my absence, and I worry my fears will be confirmed. Besides, I’ve worn you out with my company."
"We are tougher, brother, Than you can put us to’t.",You couldn’t wear me out if you tried.
No longer stay.,I can’t stay any longer.
One seven-night longer.,Just one more week.
"Very sooth, to-morrow.","Really, tomorrow."
We’ll part the time between’s then; and in that I’ll no gainsaying.,"We’ll split the difference, and I won’t hear any objections."
"There is no tongue that moves, none, none i’ the world, So soon as yours could win me: so it should now, Were there necessity in your request, although ’Twere needful I denied it. My affairs Were in your love a whip to me; my stay To you a charge and trouble: to save both, Farewell, our brother.","Please, don’t plead with me. There is no one who can persuade me like you can, and you could persuade me to stay now if you really needed me to, even if it were necessary that I deny your request. My business does drag me home, so your attempts to keep me here, though done out of love, are painful to me. My staying only costs you and causes you trouble, so for both our sakes, I must go."
"Tongue-tied, our queen?","My queen, are you mute? Speak."
"I had thought, sir, to have held my peace until You have drawn oaths from him not to stay. You, sir, Charge him too coldly. Tell him, you are sure All in Bohemia’s well; this satisfaction He’s beat from his best ward.","I intended to keep quiet until you’d made him promise to stay. You argue too mildly. Tell him you are sure that things in Bohemia are fine—in fact, just the other day it was proclaimed so. Tell him this, and his best argument for leaving is gone."
"Well said, Hermione.","Well said, Hermione."
"To tell, he longs to see his son, were strong: But let him say so then, and let him go; We’ll thwack him hence with distaffs. Yet of your royal presence I’ll adventure The borrow of a week. When at Bohemia You take my lord, I’ll give him my commission Prefix’d for’s parting: yet, good deed, Leontes, I love thee not a jar o’ the clock behind What lady-she her lord. You’ll stay?","If he says that he wants to see his son, that’s a strong argument. But let him say it first, then let him go. If he swears to that, he won’t stay. We’ll chase him off by whacking him with wooden staffs. But I’m guessing he will remain in your presence another week. (to Polixenes) When you receive my lord in Bohemia, I’ll give him permission to stay a month past his fixed departure day. (to Leontes) Yet, Leontes, I don’t love you a jot less than any other woman loves her lord. Polixenes, you’ll stay?"
"No, madam.","No, madam."
"Nay, but you will?","No, but you will?"
"I may not, verily.","I can’t, honestly."
"Verily! You put me off with limber vows; but I, Though you would seek to unsphere the Should yet say ‘Sir, no going.’ Verily, You shall not go: a lady’s ‘Verily’ ’s As potent as a lord’s. Will you go yet? Force me to keep you as a prisoner, When you depart, and save your thanks. How say you? My prisoner? or my guest? by your dread ‘Verily,’ One of them you shall be.","Honestly! You counter me with weak vows, but even if you would try to take the stars out of the sky with your oaths, I’ll still say you are not going. Truly, you won’t go—my “truly” is as powerful as yours. Will you still go? You’ll force me to keep you like a prisoner, not like a guest, and you’ll have to pay a fine at the end, rather than give us thanks. What do you think? My prisoner, or my guest? “Truly,” as you say, you’ll be one of the two."
"Your guest, then, madam: Which is for me less easy to commit Than you to punish.","Your guest then, madam. Being your prisoner would suggest I’ve offended you, which would be more difficult and painful for me than your punishment."
"Not your gaoler, then, But your kind hostess. Come, I’ll question you You were pretty lordings then?","I won’t be your jailer, then, but your kind hostess. Come, I’ll ask you about the tricks you and my husband played when you were boys. You were handsome princes then?"
"We were, fair queen, Two lads that thought there was no more behind But such a day to-morrow as to-day,","We were, fair queen, two young boys who thought that tomorrow would be just like today, and that we would be boys forever."
Was not my lord The verier wag o’ the two?,Was my husband the bigger prankster of you two?
"We were as twinn’d lambs that did frisk i’ the sun, And bleat the one at the other: what we changed The doctrine of ill-doing, nor dream’d That any did. Had we pursued that life, And our weak spirits ne’er been higher rear’d With stronger blood, we should have answer’d heaven Hereditary ours.","We were like two lambs that played in the sun and bleated at one another. We were wholly innocent. We didn’t know what it was to do harm, or even that anyone did. Had we continued this way, and had our weak spirits never given way to stronger passions, we could have said upon reaching Heaven that we were “not guilty,” and we would have been cleared even of original sin The doctrine that all people are born tainted by sin because the first humans, Adam and Eve, disobeyed God. original sin ."
By this we gather You have tripp’d since.,I take it that you have not been so innocent since?
O my most sacred lady! In those unfledged days was my wife a girl; Your precious self had then not cross’d the eyes Of my young play-fellow.,"Most sacred lady! We’ve had our temptations since then. In those youthful days my wife was just a girl, and my playfellow had not yet seen you."
"Grace to boot! Your queen and I are devils: yet go on; The offences we have made you do we’ll answer, If you first sinn’d with us and that with us You did continue fault and that you slipp’d not","Heaven help me! Don’t pursue that train of thought, or you’ll go on to say that your wife and I are devils. Still, keep going. We’ll take responsibility for whatever sins we’ve made you commit, as long as those sins were committed first with us, only with us, and you’ve never sinned with any other."
Is he won yet?,Is he won over yet?
He’ll stay my lord.,"He’ll stay, my lord."
"At my request he would not. Hermione, my dearest, thou never spokest","When I requested it he would not. Hermione, my dearest, you’ve never spoken so well."
Never?,Never?
"Never, but once.",Only once before.
"What! have I twice said well? when was’t before? I prithee tell me; cram’s with praise, and make’s Slaughters a thousand waiting upon that. Our praises are our wages: you may ride’s With one soft kiss a thousand furlongs ere With spur we beat an acre. But to the goal: What was my first? it has an elder sister, Or I mistake you: O, would her name were Grace! But once before I spoke to the purpose: when? Nay, let me have’t; I long.","What! I’ve only spoken well twice? When was the last time? Please, tell me. Fill me up with praise and make me as fat as a pet. If one good deed goes unrecognized, the thousand more that might have been inspired by it will never occur. Praise is our motivation and reward. One soft kiss will take you two hundred yards; a sharp kick only gets you an acre. But back to the point: my last good deed was to plead for Polixenes to stay. What was my first good deed? Unless I’m misunderstanding what you said, there was an earlier one. Oh, if only my name were Grace! So once before I’ve spoken well. When? Tell me, please, I long to know."
"Three crabbed months had sour’d themselves to death, Ere I could make thee open thy white hand And clap thyself my love: then didst thou utter ‘I am yours for ever.’","Why, it was when three bitter months had passed before I could get you to pledge your love to me with your white hands. And then you said, “I am yours forever.”"
"Why, lo you now, I have spoke to the purpose twice: The one for ever earn’d a royal husband; The other for some while a friend.","It is grace, indeed. According to you, I have spoken well twice: once to earn a royal husband and again to keep a friend The word “friend” could also mean lover, a meaning Leontes refers to in the speech that follows. friend a while longer."
"[Aside] Too hot, too hot! I have tremor cordis on me: my heart dances; But not for joy; not joy. This entertainment May a free face put on, derive a liberty From heartiness, from bounty, fertile bosom, But to be paddling palms and pinching fingers, As now they are, and making practised smiles, As in a looking-glass, and then to sigh, as ’twere The mort o’ the deer; O, that is entertainment Art thou my boy?","(aside) That is too much! To take friendship too far is to make it a love affair. My heart is trembling and dancing, but not for joy. This hospitality may have an innocent face, and my wife’s generosity may in fact come from warmth, affection, and the fact that it makes her more attractive. Maybe. But to hold hands, as they are doing right now, and flirtatiously smile at each other as though into a mirror, all the while sighing as loud as a horn blast Shakespeare’s original language referred to the horn sounded in hunting to signal the death of a hunted deer. horn blast , that is not entertainment that pleases my heart, or my head. Mamillius, are you my son?"
"Ay, my good lord.","Yes, my good lord."
"I’ fecks! Why, that’s my bawcock. What, hast They say it is a copy out of mine. Come, captain, We must be neat; not neat, but cleanly, captain: And yet the steer, the heifer and the calf Are all call’d neat.—Still virginalling Art thou my calf?","In faith! That’s my fine fellow. What, have you smudged your nose? They say it looks just like mine. Come on, captain, you must be neat The term refers to cattle with horns, leading to Leontes’s comment in the next sentence. neat , that is, clean. Yet the steer, the heifer, and the calf are all called neat. Still playing her fingers up and down his palm! What are you up to, you silly calf? Are you my calf?"
"Yes, if you will, my lord.","Yes, if you’d like me to be, my lord."
"Thou want’st a rough pash and the shoots that I have, To be full like me: yet they say we are That will say anything but were they false As o’er-dyed blacks, as wind, as waters, false As dice are to be wish’d by one that fixes No bourn ’twixt his and mine, yet were it true Look on me with your welkin eye: sweet villain! Most dear’st! my collop! Can thy dam?—may’t be?— Affection! thy intention stabs the centre: Thou dost make possible things not so held, With what’s unreal thou coactive art, And fellow’st nothing: then ’tis very credent Thou mayst co-join with something; and thou dost, And that beyond commission, and I find it, And hardening of my brows.","You need a shaggy head and horns Men whose wives have been unfaithful, or cuckolds, were often depicted with horns. horns to be just like me. Still, they say we are as alike as a pair of eggs. Women say that, and they will say anything. But even if they were as false as Africans or black fabric A common belief at the time was that Africans were sexually promiscuous and thus “false” in that they weren’t faithful. Black fabric, meanwhile, became weak, or “false,” as a result of the chemicals used to make the black dye. as false as Africans or black fabric , or as fickle as the wind and the water, or fixed as a cheating gambler wants the dice to be, it would still be true that this boy looks like me. Come, sir page, look at me with your sky blue eye. Sweet villain! Dearest! My flesh! Can your mother have? Could it be? Jealousy’s intensity strikes me through to my heart and makes things that are impossible seem possible. That jealousy speaks in dreams. How can this be? It collaborates with what’s unreal and corresponds to nothing in real life. Then it’s very believable that my jealousy may be real, and she’s gone beyond what’s permitted, and I would find out and grow insane, and my brow would harden into horns."
What means Sicilia?,What is Leontes saying?
He something seems unsettled.,He seems upset.
"How, my lord?","How are you, my lord?"
"What cheer? how is’t with you, best brother?","What news? How are you, my best brother?"
"You look as if you held a brow of much distraction Are you moved, my lord?","You look distracted. Are you upset, my lord?"
"No, in good earnest. How sometimes nature will betray its folly, To harder bosoms! Looking on the lines Of my boy’s face, methoughts I did recoil Twenty-three years, and saw myself unbreech’d, In my green velvet coat, my dagger muzzled, As ornaments oft do, too dangerous: How like, methought, I then was to this kernel, This squash, this gentleman. Mine honest friend, Will you take eggs for money?","No, truly. Sometimes nature shows its weakness, its tenderness, and makes itself a source of amusement for harder hearts. Looking at my boy’s face, I thought I had gone back twenty-three years and saw myself without trousers Leontes means he saw himself as a young boy who was not yet wearing men’s clothing. In England at the time, boys younger than six were dressed in gowns. Putting a boy in trousers, or breeches, signified the boy’s transition out of childhood. without trousers , in my green velvet coat, with my dagger carefully sheathed so I would not hurt myself on it and so it wouldn’t prove too dangerous, as toys often do. I thought how alike I was at that age to this child, this young boy, this gentleman. My honest friend, will you accept something relatively worthless in exchange for something valuable?"
"No, my lord, I’ll fight.","No, my lord, I’ll fight."
"You will! why, happy man be’s dole! My brother, Are you so fond of your young prince as we Do seem to be of ours?","You will! May happiness be his fortune! My brother, are you as fond of your young prince as I seem to be of mine?"
"If at home, sir, Now my sworn friend and then mine enemy, My parasite, my soldier, statesman, all: He makes a July’s day short as December, And with his varying childness cures in me","When I’m home, sir, he’s my occupation, my laughter, all I worry about. First he’s my sworn friend, then he’s an enemy, a freeloader, a soldier, and a statesman, all together. He makes a long summer’s day feel as short as a day in the middle of winter. And his childish ways keep me from gloomy thoughts."
"So stands this squire Officed with me: we two will walk, my lord, And leave you to your graver steps. Hermione, How thou lovest us, show in our brother’s welcome; Next to thyself and my young rover, he’s Apparent to my heart.","This young squire here does the same for me. He and I will walk along, my lord, and leave you to your slower steps. Hermione, show how much you love us in how you entertain our brother. Give him whatever he wants, no matter how expensive. After you and my young son, he’s dearest to me."
"If you would seek us, We are yours i’ the garden: shall’s attend you there?","If you are looking for us, we’ll be in the garden. Should we wait for you there?"
"Be you beneath the sky. Aside I am angling now, Though you perceive me not how I give line. How she holds up the neb, the bill to him! And arms her with the boldness of a wife To her allowing husband!","Do whatever pleases you. I’ll find you, if you are anywhere under the sky. (aside) I’m fishing now, though no one sees how I set the line. Go on! Look how she holds up her nose and mouth to him, as if to be kissed. She acts with the boldness of a wife toward her husband!"
"Gone already! ears a fork’d one! Go, play, boy, play: thy mother plays, and I Play too, but so disgraced a part, whose issue Will hiss me to my grave: contempt and clamour There have been, Or I am much deceived, cuckolds ere now; And many a man there is, even at this present, Now while I speak this, holds his wife by the arm, And his pond fish’d by his next neighbour, by Sir Smile, his neighbour: nay, there’s comfort in’t Whiles other men have gates and those gates open’d, As mine, against their will. Should all despair Would hang themselves. Physic for’t there is none; It is a bawdy planet, that will strike Where ’tis predominant; and ’tis powerful, think it, From east, west, north and south: be it concluded, It will let in and out the enemy With bag and baggage: many thousand on’s Have the disease, and feel’t not. How now, boy!","Gone already! A little here, knee deep there, then grow horns over my head and behind my ears! Go, boy, play. Your mother plays around, and I play a role, though my part is one of a disgrace, with the result that I’ll be hissed on my way to the grave, with contempt as my funeral bells. Go play, boy, play. Unless I’m mistaken, there have been cuckolds before. Even now, as I speak, there is many a man who may hold his wife by the arm without suspecting that she has been unfaithful in his absence, and his neighbor, call him Sir Smile, has been with the woman that belongs to him. There’s comfort in the fact that other men have had wives and those wives have been unfaithful, as mine has, against their will. If everyone whose wife strayed were to despair, a tenth of mankind would hang themselves. There’s no remedy for it, since it is a world full of lust, from east to west and north and south. There’s no barricade you can build around the womb, and one’s enemy will go in and out as he pleases. Thousands of us have the disease and don’t know it. What now, boy?"
"I am like you, they say.","I look like you, they say."
"Why that’s some comfort. What, Camillo there?","That’s some comfort. Camillo, are you there?"
"Ay, my good lord.","Yes, my good lord."
"Go play, Mamillius; thou’rt an honest man.","Go play, Mamillius, that’s a good boy."
"Camillo, this great sir will yet stay longer.","Camillo, my friend Polixenes will stay longer."
You had much ado to make his anchor hold:,"You had to go to great lengths to make him stay. No matter what you said, he insisted he would leave."
Didst note it?,Did you see it?
He would not stay at your petitions: made His business more material.,"He wouldn’t heed your pleas, but said his business was too important."
"Didst perceive it? ‘Sicilia is a so-forth:’ ’tis far gone, When I shall gust it last. How came’t, Camillo, That he did stay?","You saw it? (aside) People know my secret already, and they are whispering and murmuring, “Sicilia is a such-and-such.” It is already so well known while I am just figuring it out. Camillo, how did it happen that he stayed?"
At the good queen’s entreaty.,Because the good queen asked him.
"But, so it is, it is not. Was this taken By any understanding pate but thine? For thy conceit is soaking, will draw in More than the common blocks: not noted, is’t, Of head-piece extraordinary? lower messes Perchance are to this business purblind? say.","True, because of the queen. “Good” should be an appropriate description, but under the circumstances it isn’t. Did anyone else see that it happened this way? Since you notice more than the common idiots, perhaps it is only seen by those intelligent enough, the ones with extraordinary intellects? Perhaps the commoners are blind to what just happened? Tell me."
"Business, my lord? I think most understand Bohemia stays here longer.","What happened, my lord? I think almost everyone understands that Polixenes will stay here longer."
Ha?,What?
Stays here longer.,He will stay here longer.
"Ay, but why?",But why?
To satisfy your highness and the entreaties Of our most gracious mistress.,To satisfy your highness and the request of our most gracious mistress.
"The entreaties of your mistress! satisfy! Let that suffice. I have trusted thee, Camillo, With all the nearest things to my heart, as well My chamber-councils, wherein, priest-like, thou Thy penitent reform’d: but we have been Deceived in thy integrity, deceived In that which seems so.","Satisfy! The request of your mistress! Satisfy her! That’s enough. I have trusted you, Camillo, with everything dearest to my heart, as well as confessed to you in my chamber. I parted from you there feeling repentant and reformed, as though departing from a visit to a priest. But now I feel that I have been deceived by what appears to be your integrity."
"Be it forbid, my lord!","Forbid the thought, my lord!"
"If thou inclinest that way, thou art a coward, Which hoxes honesty behind, restraining From course required; or else thou must be counted A servant grafted in my serious trust That seest a game play’d home, the rich stake drawn, And takest it all for jest.","Now that I think of it, you are either dishonest or, if you are honest, you are a coward, hiding your honesty for fear of having to follow the correct course of action. Perhaps you neglect your duties as a most trusted servant, or perhaps you are a fool who sees the high stakes of a game but thinks it’s all a joke."
"My gracious lord, I may be negligent, foolish and fearful; But that his negligence, his folly, fear, Among the infinite doings of the world, Sometime puts forth. In your affairs, my lord, If ever I were wilful-negligent, I play’d the fool, it was my negligence, Not weighing well the end; if ever fearful To do a thing, where I the issue doubted, Where of the execution did cry out Which oft infects the wisest: these, my lord, Are such allow’d infirmities that honesty Is never free of. But, beseech your grace, Be plainer with me; let me know my trespass ’Tis none of mine.","My gracious lord, I may be negligent, foolish, and cowardly. No man is free from all those vices, and they will occasionally turn up. In your affairs, my lord, if I was ever deliberately negligent, it was because of my foolishness. If I ever pretended to be a fool, it was because of my neglectfulness and my inability to judge the consequences. If ever I was afraid to do something when I was uncertain of the outcome—and the deed was so necessary it had to be done—it was a fear that even wise men feel. My lord, these are acceptable weaknesses that honesty is always plagued by. But I beg your grace to be blunt: tell me exactly what I did wrong. Then if I deny that I did it, it truly is not my fault."
"Ha’ not you seen, Camillo,— But that’s past doubt, you have, or your eye-glass Is thicker than a cuckold’s horn,—or heard,— Cannot be mute,—or thought,—for cogitation Resides not in that man that does not think,— My wife is slippery? If thou wilt confess, Or else be impudently negative, My wife’s a hobby-horse, deserves a name As rank as any flax-wench that puts to Before her troth-plight: say’t and justify’t.","Haven’t you seen? You have, that’s not in doubt, unless you are willfully blind. Or perhaps you have heard, since rumors can’t be mute in the face of something so obvious. Or maybe you have thought, since every man who thinks must have thought it. Isn’t my wife deceiving me? You must confess, unless you want to shamelessly deny that you have either eyes or ears or thought, that my wife is a whore, and deserves a name as awful as any base woman deserves who sleeps with a man before she is married. Say it and affirm it."
"I would not be a stander-by to hear My present vengeance taken: ’shrew my heart, You never spoke what did become you less Than this; which to reiterate were sin As deep as that, though true.","I wouldn’t stand by and listen to my mistress be slandered like that without taking revenge immediately. Curse my heart, I’ve never heard you speak in a way that suited you less. To say it again would be as sinful as the crime you are describing, even if it was true."
"Is leaning cheek to cheek? is meeting noses? Kissing with inside lip? stopping the career Of laughing with a sigh?—a note infallible Of breaking honesty—horsing foot on foot? Hours, minutes? noon, midnight? and all eyes Blind with the pin and web but theirs, theirs only, That would unseen be wicked? is this nothing? Why, then the world and all that’s in’t is nothing; My wife is nothing; nor nothing have these nothings, If this be nothing.","Is it nothing that they whisper together? Lean their cheeks together? Or touch noses? Or kisses? Or interrupt their laughter with sighs, a certain sign that they’re in love? Or playing footsie? Or lurking in corners? Or wishing that time would run faster, that hours were minutes and noon midnight, and that all eyes were blind with cataracts but theirs, so that they can be wicked without being seen? Is this nothing? Why, then the world and everything in it is nothing. The sky is nothing, Polixenes is nothing, my wife is nothing, and they have nothing, if this is nothing."
"Good my lord, be cured Of this diseased opinion, and betimes;","My lord, let go of this terrible opinion, and quickly, because it is dangerous."
"Say it be, ’tis true.","Say it is, but it is true."
"No, no, my lord.","No, no, my lord."
"It is; you lie, you lie: I say thou liest, Camillo, and I hate thee, Or else a hovering temporizer, that Canst with thine eyes at once see good and evil, Inclining to them both: were my wife’s liver Infected as her life, she would not live","It is true, and you lie. I say you lie, Camillo, and I hate you. I call you a horrible oaf, a mindless slave, or else nervous and wishy-washy, who’s able to see good and evil in the same thing and is inclined to both. If my wife were as diseased physically as she is morally, she wouldn’t survive an hour."
Who does infect her?,Who corrupts her?
"Why, he that wears her like a medal, hanging About his neck, Bohemia: who, if I Had servants true about me, that bare eyes Their own particular thrifts, they would do that Which should undo more doing: ay, and thou, His cupbearer,—whom I from meaner form Have benched and reared to worship, who mayst see How I am galled,—mightst bespice a cup, To give mine enemy a lasting wink; Which draught to me were cordial.","The one who wears her like a medal around his neck: Polixenes. If I had loyal servants, who saw my honor as their business and personal gain, they would act to prevent any more of this affair. And you, his cupbearer The man who served wine to the master in a noble household. cupbearer —I brought you up from a low rank, have given you some authority, and brought you up to respectability. You should be able to see plainly how upset I am. You could poison his drink to kill him, which would make me feel better."
"Sir, my lord, But with a lingering dram that should not work Maliciously like poison: but I cannot Believe this crack to be in my dread mistress, So sovereignly being honourable.","My lord, I could do it with a tiny amount of a slow-working potion that isn’t as violent as poison. But I can’t believe that my noble mistress would be so flawed, having shown herself always so honorable. I have loved you—"
"Make that thy question, and go rot! Dost think I am so muddy, so unsettled, To appoint myself in this vexation, sully The purity and whiteness of my sheets, Is goads, thorns, nettles, tails of wasps, Give scandal to the blood o’ the prince my son, Who I do think is mine and love as mine, Without ripe moving to’t? Would I do this?","Make that your problem, and go to hell! Do you think I am so dull-witted, so unsettled, that I would give myself all this trouble and dirty up the pure, clean whiteness of my bed? To preserve that purity gives one peace of mind, but if it’s tainted it hurts like thorns, nettles, and wasp stings. Do you think I would raise doubt about the legitimacy of my son, who I believe is mine and who I love, without compelling reasons? Would I do this? Could I turn aside from this?"
"I must believe you, sir: I do; and will fetch off Bohemia for’t; Provided that, when he’s removed, your highness Will take again your queen as yours at first, The injury of tongues in courts and kingdoms Known and allied to yours.","I must believe you sir, and I do. I’ll take care of Polixenes for you, as long as once he’s gone you will again treat your wife as your own, at least for your son’s sake. That way you will silence all the harmful rumors that might spread to other kingdoms and courts that are allied with you."
Thou dost advise me Even so as I mine own course have set down:,You advise me to do what I already determined I would do. I won’t tarnish her reputation in any way.
"My lord, Go then; and with a countenance as clear As friendship wears at feasts, keep with Bohemia And with your queen. I am his cupbearer: Account me not your servant.","My lord, then go, and with a face as open and friendly as if you were at a party, keep company with Polixenes and your queen. I am his cupbearer, and I will give him the potion, or no longer think of me as your servant."
"This is all: Do’t and thou hast the one half of my heart; Do’t not, thou split’st thine own.",Do this and you will have one half of my heart. Don’t do it and your own will be split.
"I’ll do’t, my lord.","I’ll do it, my lord."
"I will seem friendly, as thou hast advised me.","I’ll act friendly, as you’ve advised me."
"O miserable lady! But, for me, What case stand I in? I must be the poisoner Of good Polixenes; and my ground to do’t Who in rebellion with himself will have All that are his so too. To do this deed, Promotion follows. If I could find example Of thousands that had struck anointed kings Nor brass nor stone nor parchment bears not one, Let villany itself forswear’t. I must Forsake the court: to do’t, or no, is certain To me a break-neck. Happy star, reign now!","Oh, unfortunate lady! What have I gotten into? I have to poison good Polixenes, only because I would obey a master who is mad and wants all his servants to be mad, too. If I do this, I’ll be promoted. But even if I could find one example of someone who had struck down a chosen king and prospered, I wouldn’t do it. Since there isn’t such an example recorded anywhere in history, even a villain wouldn’t do it. I have to leave the court, since whether I do it or not I’m certain to be hanged. Oh, good! Here comes Polixenes."
"This is strange: methinks My favour here begins to warp. Not speak? Good day, Camillo.",This is odd. I think I’m losing favor here. He wouldn’t speak? Good day Camillo.
"Hail, most royal sir!","Hello, most royal sir!"
What is the news i’ the court?,What is the news of the court?
"None rare, my lord.","Nothing unusual, my lord."
"The king hath on him such a countenance As he had lost some province and a region Loved as he loves himself: even now I met him Wafting his eyes to the contrary and falling A lip of much contempt, speeds from me and So leaves me to consider what is breeding That changeth thus his manners.","The king looked as though he had lost a part of his kingdom as dear to him as himself. Just now I met him with the usual cordial greetings, but turning his eyes away and sneering in contempt, he walked away from me, leaving me to wonder what happened to make him act this way."
"I dare not know, my lord.","I don’t dare know, my lord."
"How! dare not! do not. Do you know, and dare not? Be intelligent to me: ’tis thereabouts; For, to yourself, what you do know, you must. And cannot say, you dare not. Good Camillo, Which shows me mine changed too; for I must be A party in this alteration, finding Myself thus alter’d with ’t.","What? You don’t dare, or you don’t know? Do you know, but don’t dare? It must be something of the sort, because if you know something for certain, you can’t deny it. Good Camillo, your face is like a mirror to me, in which your changed expression shows my own. I must be responsible in some way for Leontes’s altered behavior, since I’m changed, too."
There is a sickness I cannot name the disease; and it is caught Of you that yet are well.,"There is an illness that makes some of us mad, but I can’t say exactly what it is. But even though you are still well, you have caught it, too."
"How! caught of me! Make me not sighted like the basilisk: By my regard, but kill’d none so. Camillo,— As you are certainly a gentleman, thereto Clerk-like experienced, which no less adorns Our gentry than our parents’ noble names, If you know aught which does behove my knowledge Thereof to be inform’d, imprison’t not In ignorant concealment.","What do you mean, I’ve caught it, too? Don’t tell me I have the deadly stare of the basilisk A mythical reptile that was able to kill with its stare. basilisk . I’ve looked at thousands of people who have been better off by having been seen by me, but I’ve never killed anyone that way. Camillo, I know you are a gentleman because you are educated, and that makes one a gentleman as much as having parents who are nobles. I beg you, if you know something I should know, please don’t pretend not to know and keep it from me."
I may not answer.,I can’t tell you.
"I must be answer’d. Dost thou hear, Camillo, I conjure thee, by all the parts of man Which honour does acknowledge, whereof the least Is not this suit of mine, that thou declare Is creeping toward me; how far off, how near; Which way to be prevented, if to be; If not, how best to bear it.","I’ve caught an illness, even though I am well! You have to tell me. Do you hear me, Camillo? I appeal to you by all the traits in a man that respond to honor, including this request itself. Tell me why you think I’m in danger, how close the danger is, and how I might prevent it. Or if I can’t, how I might best endure it."
"Sir, I will tell you; That I think honourable: therefore mark my counsel, Which must be even as swiftly follow’d as I mean to utter it, or both yourself and me Cry lost, and so good night!","Sir, I will tell you, since I am obligated by my honor and since you’re an honorable man. Therefore listen to my advice, which must be followed immediately, or both you and I will be doomed and will meet a bad end."
"On, good Camillo.","Go ahead, good Camillo."
I am appointed him to murder you.,I have been appointed by him to murder you.
"By whom, Camillo?","By whom, Camillo?"
By the king.,By the king.
For what?,Why?
"As he had seen’t or been an instrument To vice you to’t, that you have touch’d his queen Forbiddenly.","He thinks, no, he swears with as much confidence as if he had seen it or even helped you do it, that you have touched his queen in a forbidden way."
"O, then my best blood turn Be yoked with his that did betray the Best! Turn then my freshest reputation to A savour that may strike the dullest nostril Where I arrive, and my approach be shunn’d, That e’er was heard or read!","If I did, may my blood turn to poison and my name be as despised as Judas’s! Let my reputation rot and stink so badly that even the least sensitive nose will be overwhelmed, and when I approach they’ll turn their backs! Let me be hated more than the worst disease that has ever been heard of!"
"Swear his thought over By each particular star in heaven and By all their influences, you may as well As or by oath remove or counsel shake The fabric of his folly, whose foundation Is piled upon his faith and will continue The standing of his body.","No matter how vehemently you swear his suspicions aren’t true, you are as likely to keep the sea from obeying the moon as you are to change his mind. Neither will oaths or wise words disturb the foundation of his foolish notion, which is built on his faith and will last for the rest of his life."
How should this grow?,How did this come about?
"I know not: but I am sure ’tis safer to Avoid what’s grown than question how ’tis born. If therefore you dare trust my honesty, That lies enclosed in this trunk which you Your followers I will whisper to the business, And will by twos and threes at several posterns Clear them o’ the city. For myself, I’ll put My fortunes to your service, which are here For, by the honour of my parents, I Have utter’d truth: which if you seek to prove, I dare not stand by; nor shall you be safer Than one condemn’d by the king’s own mouth, thereon","I don’t know, but I’m sure it’s safer to avoid his jealousy than to wonder why he feels that way. So if you trust my honesty, which you shall take as my pledge, then leave tonight! I’ll quietly let your followers know and get them out of the back gates of the city two or three at a time. As for me, I’ve lost everything I have by revealing this to you, but I’ll put what I have to your service. Don’t be uncertain. By the honor of my parents, I’m telling the truth. If you try to prove it, I’ll deny I ever said it. You won’t be any safer than a man whom the king himself has condemned to be executed."
"I do believe thee: I saw his heart in ’s face. Give me thy hand: Be pilot to me and thy places shall Still neighbour mine. My ships are ready and Two days ago. This jealousy Is for a precious creature: as she’s rare, Must it be great, and as his person’s mighty, Must it be violent, and as he does conceive Profess’d to him, why, his revenges must In that be made more bitter. Fear o’ershades me: Good expedition be my friend, and comfort The gracious queen, part of his theme, but nothing I will respect thee as a father if Thou bear’st my life off hence: let us avoid.","I do believe you. I saw what he felt in his face. Give me your hand. Guide me and our fortunes will remain together. My ships are ready, and my people expected me to depart two days ago. He’s jealous over a very precious woman, and so his jealousy will be as great as she is rare, and as violent as he is powerful. And since he thinks that a man who always professed friendship has deceived him, his revenge will be even more bitter. I’m overwhelmed with fear. May my swift exit help me, and may it comfort the good queen, who has no responsibility for his unjustified suspicions. Come, Camillo. I will respect you like a father if you take me away safely. Let us leave."
It is in mine authority to command The keys of all the posterns: please your highness,"I have the authority to pass through all the back gates of the city. Let’s go soon. Come, sir, let’s leave."
"Take the boy to you: he so troubles me, ‘Tis past enduring.",Take the boy. He is such a pest I can’t take it anymore.
"Come, my gracious lord, Shall I be your playfellow?","Come with me, my gracious lord. Shall I play with you?"
"No, I’ll none of you.","No, I don’t want anything to do with you."
"Why, my sweet lord?","Why, my sweet lord?"
You’ll kiss me hard and speak to me as if I were a baby still. I love you better.,You’ll kiss me too hard and talk baby talk to me. (to Second Lady) I love you better.
"And why so, my lord?","Why is that, my lord?"
"Your brows are blacker; yet black brows, they say, Become some women best, so that there be not Too much hair there, but in a semicircle Or a half-moon made with a pen.","Not because your eyebrows are blacker, though they say that black eyebrows suit some women best, as long as there isn’t too much hair and they are shaped like a semicircle, or drawn like a half-moon."
Who taught you this?,Who taught you that?
I learnt it out of women’s faces. Pray now What colour are your eyebrows?,"I learned it from looking at women’s faces. Tell me, what color are your eyebrows?"
"Blue, my lord.","Blue, my lord."
"Nay, that’s a mock: I have seen a lady’s nose","No, you’re joking. I’ve seen a lady’s nose that was blue, but not her eyebrows."
"Hark ye; The queen your mother rounds apace: we shall Present our services to a fine new prince One of these days; and then you’ld wanton with us,","Listen: your mother the queen is getting rounder by the day. We’ll be serving a fine new prince one day soon, and then you’ll want to play with us, if we’ll let you."
She is spread of late Into a goodly bulk: good time encounter her!,She has become quite big lately. May it come quickly for her!
"What wisdom stirs amongst you? Come, sir, now I am for you again: pray you, sit by us,","What are you talking about now? Come, sir, now I’m ready for you again. Sit next to me, and tell me a story."
Merry or sad shall’t be?,Should it be happy or serious?
As merry as you will.,As happy as you’d like.
A sad tale’s best for winter: I have one Of sprites and goblins.,A sad story is best for the winter. I have one about fairies and goblins.
"Come on, sit down: come on, and do your best To fright me with your sprites; you’re powerful at it.","Let’s hear it, good sir. Come on, sit down, and try to frighten me with your fairies. You’re good at it."
There was a man—,There was a man—
"Nay, come, sit down; then on.","No, sit down, and then tell me."
Yond crickets shall not hear it.,"—who lived by a churchyard. I’ll tell it quietly, so those other ladies won’t hear it."
"Come on, then, And give’t me in mine ear.","Come on then, and tell me in my ear."
Was he met there? his train? Camillo with him?,Did his men meet him there? Camillo was with him?
Saw I men scour so on their way: I eyed them Even to their ships.,I ran across them behind the pine grove. I’ve never seen men move so quickly along. I saw them go all the way to their ships.
"How blest am I In my just censure, in my true opinion! In being so blest! There may be in the cup A spider steep’d, and one may drink, depart, And yet partake no venom, for his knowledge Is not infected: but if one present How he hath drunk, he cracks his gorge, his sides, With violent hefts. I have drunk, and seen the spider. Camillo was his help in this, his pander: All’s true that is mistrusted: that false villain Whom I employ’d was pre-employ’d by him: He has discover’d my design, and I Remain a pinch’d thing; yea, a very trick So easily open?","I’m so blessed to have such accurate judgment, and such a correct opinion! Alas, if only I knew less! I’m cursed to be so blessed! There may be a spider in your cup, and if you drink without realizing it, you aren’t hurt. But if you see the spider and know you have drunk it, you will wretch and heave violently. I have drunk from the cup, and I know that the spider was in it. Camillo helped him and acted as his pimp. There is a plot to kill me and take my place as king. Everything that I suspected is true. That traitorous villain I employed actually worked for Polixenes. He has discovered my plan, and I’m still tormented, a toy for them to play with. How were the gates so easily opened?"
By his great authority; Which often hath no less prevail’d than so On your command.,"By Camillo’s authority, which he’s often wielded by your command."
"Give me the boy: I am glad you did not nurse him: Though he does bear some signs of me, yet you Have too much blood in him.","I know it too well. Give me the boy. I am glad you didn’t breastfeed him. He may look a bit like me, but he looks too much like you."
What is this? sport?,"What is this, a joke?"
Away with him! and let her sport herself With that she’s big with; for ’tis Polixenes Has made thee swell thus.,"Take the boy away. He won’t be near her anymore. Take him away! Let her play with the one she’s pregnant with now, since it is Polixenes’s child."
"But I’ld say he had not, Howe’er you lean to the nayward.","I’ll say it is not and will swear that you should believe me, whatever you think to the contrary."
"You, my lords, Look on her, mark her well; be but about To say ‘she is a goodly lady,’ and ‘Tis pity she’s not honest, honourable:’ Praise her but for this her without-door form, Which on my faith deserves high speech, and straight The shrug, the hum or ha, these petty brands That mercy does, for calumny will sear Virtue itself: these shrugs, these hums and ha’s, When you have said ‘she’s goodly,’ come between Ere you can say ‘she’s honest:’ but be ’t known, She’s an adulteress.","My lords, look at her closely. If you are tempted to say, “She is a fine lady,” the wisdom of your hearts will add, “A shame that she isn’t virtuous or honorable.” Praise her for anything but her outward form, which does deserve praise, and immediately you must shrug or mutter to yourself. Those are the expressions that slander uses—no, I’m wrong—that mercy uses, because slander only attacks someone who is virtuous. These shrugs and mutterings after you say, “She’s goodly” interrupt you before you can say, “She’s virtuous.” Listen to the man who has the most reason to be upset about it: she’s an adulteress."
"Should a villain say so, The most replenish’d villain in the world, He were as much more villain: you, my lord,","If a villain said so, the worst in the world, saying so would make him even more of a villain. My lord, you are mistaken."
"You have mistook, my lady, Polixenes for Leontes: O thou thing! Which I’ll not call a creature of thy place, Lest barbarism, making me the precedent, And mannerly distinguishment leave out Betwixt the prince and beggar: I have said She’s an adulteress; I have said with whom: More, she’s a traitor and Camillo is What she should shame to know herself But with her most vile principal, that she’s A bed-swerver, even as bad as those That vulgars give bold’st titles, ay, and privy","My lady, you have mistaken Polixenes for me. Oh, you creature! I won’t give you the title that goes with your high social status, or I’ll set a precedent allowing rudeness to use the same names for everyone and not distinguish between a prince and a beggar. I have said she is an adulteress, and I have said with whom. Even more than that, she is a traitor, and she is in league with Camillo, who knows what she should be ashamed of: that she’s an adulteress. She’s as bad as the women that common people give the coarsest name to, and she knew that they were escaping."
"No, by my life. Privy to none of this. How will this grieve you, When you shall come to clearer knowledge, that You thus have publish’d me! Gentle my lord, You did mistake.","No, I swear on my life I knew none of this. You’ll regret publicly shaming me like this when you realize you are wrong! My gentle lord, you can make it all right again by saying you made a mistake."
"No; if I mistake In those foundations which I build upon, The centre is not big enough to bear He who shall speak for her is afar off guilty But that he speaks.","No. If I am wrong about this, then the Earth isn’t big enough to hold a schoolboy’s top a top for spinning, such as schoolboys would play with top . Take her to prison! Anyone who would defend her is indirectly as guilty as she is, just by speaking."
"There’s some ill planet reigns: I must be patient till the heavens look I am not prone to weeping, as our sex Commonly are; the want of which vain dew Perchance shall dry your pities: but I have That honourable grief lodged here which burns With thoughts so qualified as your charities Shall best instruct you, measure me; and so The king’s will be perform’d!","The stars must be aligned in a way that is making everyone mad! I must be patient until their positions change. My good lords, I don’t cry as much as other women do, which might make you think I’m not deserving of pity. But my honorable grief burns more fiercely than tears can extinguish. I beg you all, my lords, judge me in as measured a manner as your sense of charity will allow. And so carry out the king’s will!"
Shall I be heard?,Will I be obeyed?
"My women may be with me; for you see My plight requires it. Do not weep, good fools; There is no cause: when you shall know your mistress Has deserved prison, then abound in tears Is for my better grace. Adieu, my lord: I never wish’d to see you sorry; now I trust I shall. My women, come; you have leave.","Who will go with me? Your highness, I beg that my women might go with me, since I need help in my condition. Don’t cry, my dear ones. There’s no reason to. If you ever know that your mistress is guilty and deserves to be in prison, then you can cry when I come out. But since I’m innocent, this trial I’m enduring will make me more virtuous. Goodbye, my lord. I never wanted to see you feeling sorry, but now I know I will. My women, come, you have permission."
"Go, do our bidding; hence!","Go on, do as I say!"
"Beseech your highness, call the queen again.","Your highness, I beg you, call the queen back."
"Be certain what you do, sir, lest your justice Prove violence; in the which three great ones suffer, Yourself, your queen, your son.","Be sure of what you are doing, sir, or what you think is justice might prove to be injustice, and three great people might suffer—you, your queen, and your son."
"I dare my life lay down and will do’t, sir, Please you to accept it, that the queen is spotless I’ the eyes of heaven and to you; I mean, In this which you accuse her.","My lord, I would lay down my life for the queen in belief that she is virtuous in both the eyes of heaven and to you. She is innocent of what you accuse her of."
"She’s otherwise, I’ll keep my stables where I lodge my wife; I’ll go in couples with her; Than when I feel and see her no farther trust her; For every inch of woman in the world,","If it turns out she’s unfaithful, I’ll guard my wife as vigilantly as I guard my horses Scholars have generally interpreted Shakespeare’s original passage in two different ways: the first is the version given here; the second is that Antigonus means he will treat his wife’s lodgings as he treats his stables, where mares and stallions are kept apart. I’ll guard my wife as vigilantly as I guard my horses , and I’ll go about leashed together with her. I will only trust her when I can touch her or see her, because if the queen is lying, then every woman in the world must be a liar."
Hold your peaces.,Be quiet.
"Good my lord,—",My good lord—
"It is for you we speak, not for ourselves: You are abused and by some putter-on I would land-damn him. Be she honour-flaw’d, I have three daughters; the eldest is eleven The second and the third, nine, and some five; If this prove true, they’ll pay for’t: I’ll geld ’em all; fourteen they shall not see, To bring false generations: they are co-heirs; And I had rather glib myself than they Should not produce fair issue.","We’re speaking for your sake, not our own. Some liar has abused your confidence, and he’ll be damned for it. If I knew who it was, I would thrash him without pity. If the queen isn’t honorable, my three daughters will pay for it, by my honor. The oldest is eleven, the next is nine and the third is about five, and I’ll make them all incapable of bearing children. They’ll be unable to have illegitimate children by the time they’re fourteen. They are all my heirs, and I’d rather castrate myself than have them bear anything other than legitimate children."
You smell this business with a sense as cold As is a dead man’s nose: but I do see’t and feel’t As you feel doing thus; and see withal The instruments that feel.,"Stop. Say no more. You’re about as perceptive as a dead man, but I see it and feel it as you feel this Leontes likely performs some action, such as touching an object, to demonstrate. as you feel this . And I also see the fingers that feel."
We need no grave to bury honesty: There’s not a grain of it the face to sweeten Of the whole dungy earth.,"If it is true, we don’t need a grave to bury honesty, because it means that there is not a shred of it on this earth."
What! lack I credit?,What? You don’t believe me?
"Upon this ground; and more it would content me To have her honour true than your suspicion, Be blamed for’t how you might.","My lord, I would rather you be wrong than me in this instance. And I’d rather it turn out that she is honorable than that you are right, regardless of how you’re blamed for it."
"Why, what need we Our forceful instigation? Our prerogative Calls not your counsels, but our natural goodness Imparts this; which if you, or stupefied Or seeming so in skill, cannot or will not We need no more of your advice: the matter, The loss, the gain, the ordering on’t, is all Properly ours.","Why do I have to debate this with you, instead of just following my own strong impulse? As king I’m not required to seek your advice, though I tell you this information out of natural goodness. But if you, who are either confused or pretend to be, can’t understand the truth as I do, then I don’t need any more of your advice. The entire affair is in my hands."
"And I wish, my liege, Without more overture.","My lord, I only wish you had spent more time considering your judgment, without making it public."
"How could that be? Either thou art most ignorant by age, Or thou wert born a fool. Camillo’s flight, Which was as gross as ever touch’d conjecture, That lack’d sight only, nought for approbation But only seeing, all other circumstances Made up to the deed, doth push on this proceeding: For in an act of this importance ’twere Most piteous to be wild, I have dispatch’d in post To sacred Delphos, to Apollo’s temple, Cleomenes and Dion, whom you know They will bring all; whose spiritual counsel had, Shall stop or spur me. Have I done well?","How do you mean? Either you have become a fool with age, or you were born that way. Camillo’s fleeing and their intimacy, which was as obvious as any suspicion that lacked only an eyewitness to confirm it, together push this matter forward. Still, since this is a serious matter and shouldn’t be handled rashly, I’ve sent Cleomenes and Dion to get further confirmation at Apollo’s temple in Delphos. You know they are competent. They’ll bring word from the oracle, and I’ll heed whatever advice it gives, whether for or against my suspicion. Is that good?"
"Well done, my lord.","Very good, my lord."
"Though I am satisfied and need no more Give rest to the minds of others, such as he Whose ignorant credulity will not Come up to the truth. So have we thought it good From our free person she should be confined, Be left her to perform. Come, follow us; We are to speak in public; for this business Will raise us all.","Even though I am sure that I am right, the oracle will convince everyone else, such as those who find themselves unable to accept the truth. So I have thought it a good idea to confine her and keep her away from me, so the treachery of Camillo and Polixenes is not left to her to perform. Come, follow me. I’m going to speak to the public, since this matter will incite everyone to action."
[Aside] If the good truth were known.,"(aside) Incite everyone to laughter, I believe, if the truth were known."
"The keeper of the prison, call to him; let him have knowledge who I am.",Call the prison overseer. Tell him who I am.
"Good lady, No court in Europe is too good for thee;","No court in Europe is good enough for you, good lady, so why are you in prison?"
"Now, good sir, You know me, do you not?","Good sir, you know me, don’t you?"
For a worthy lady And one whom much I honour.,I know you as a worthy woman and one I have great respect for.
Conduct me to the queen.,"Please, then, take me to the queen."
"I may not, madam: To the contrary I have express commandment.","I can’t, madam. I have explicit orders not to."
"Here’s ado, The access of gentle visitors! Is’t lawful, pray you, To see her women? any of them? Emilia?",Such a fuss just to keep kind visitors from seeing such an honest and honorable lady! Am I allowed to see her attendants? Any of them? Emilia?
"So please you, madam, Shall bring Emilia forth.","If you would please send away your attendants, I’ll bring out Emilia."
"I pray now, call her. Withdraw yourselves.","Please, call her. (to her attendants) Leave me here. The gentleman and the attendants exit."
"And, madam,","Madam, I must be present while you speak with Emilia."
"Well, be’t so, prithee.","Well, if you must."
Here’s such ado to make no stain a stain As passes colouring.,What a great effort to make the queen guilty beyond justification when she is actually innocent.
"Dear gentlewoman,","Dear gentlewoman, how is our gracious lady?"
"As well as one so great and so forlorn May hold together: on her frights and griefs, Which never tender lady hath born greater, She is something before her time deliver’d.","As well as can be expected for one so great and so sad. Because of her overwhelming grief and fright, which are greater than a kind woman has ever suffered, she has delivered her baby prematurely."
A boy?,A boy?
"A daughter, and a goodly babe, Lusty and like to live: the queen receives Much comfort in’t; says ‘My poor prisoner, I am innocent as you.’","A strong and healthy daughter. The queen draws comfort from the child, saying, “My poor prisoner, I am as innocent as you are.”"
"These dangerous unsafe lunes i’ the king, beshrew them! He must be told on’t, and he shall: the office Becomes a woman best; I’ll take’t upon me: And never to my red-look’d anger be The trumpet any more. Pray you, Emilia, Commend my best obedience to the queen: If she dares trust me with her little babe, Her advocate to the loud’st. We do not know How he may soften at the sight o’ the child: The silence often of pure innocence Persuades when speaking fails.","I swear that the king must give up these dangerous fits of madness—curse them! He must be told, and I’ll do it—it’s a task best suited to a woman. If I am deceitful, let my tongue blister and never be capable of expressing my anger ever again. Please, Emilia, tell the queen that I am her devoted supporter, and if she’ll trust me with the baby I’ll show her to the king and be her loudest advocate. Maybe he will soften up at the sight of the child. Pure silent innocence can sometimes convince when speech fails to do so."
"Your honour and your goodness is so evident That your free undertaking cannot miss A thriving issue: there is no lady living So meet for this great errand. Please your ladyship Acquaint the queen of your most noble offer; Who but to-day hammer’d of this design, But durst not tempt a minister of honour, Lest she should be denied.","Worthy madam, you are so obviously honorable and good that your generous mission cannot fail to have a positive outcome. There is no lady living more suitable for this great errand. If you’ll make your way to the next room, I’ll tell the queen of your noble offer. Just today she had come up with a similar plan, but was afraid to approach any noble person, fearing she’d be rejected."
"I’ll use that tongue I have: if wit flow from’t As boldness from my bosom, let ’t not be doubted I shall do good.","Emilia, tell her that I’ll speak as well as I can. If I have as much intelligence as I have courage, don’t doubt that I’ll do some good."
Now be you blest for it! come something nearer.,"Bless you for it! I’ll go to the queen. Please, come closer."
"Madam, if’t please the queen to send the babe, I know not what I shall incur to pass it, Having no warrant.","Madam, if the queen wants to send the baby, I don’t know how I’ll be punished for allowing it, since I don’t have any official approval."
"This child was prisoner to the womb and is By law and process of great nature thence Freed and enfranchised, not a party to The anger of the king nor guilty of,","Don’t worry, sir. The child was a prisoner of the womb, and now by natural law she is free from it. She’s not part of the king’s anger, or guilty of any trespass of the queen, if any even exists."
I do believe it.,I believe it.
"Do not you fear: upon mine honour, I will stand betwixt you and danger.","Don’t worry. On my honor, I will you defend you myself."
"Nor night nor day no rest: it is but weakness To bear the matter thus; mere weakness. If The cause were not in being,—part o’ the cause, She the adulteress; for the harlot king And level of my brain, plot-proof; but she I can hook to me: say that she were gone, Given to the fire, a moiety of my rest Might come to me again. Who’s there?","I can’t rest night or day. It is a kind of weakness to be so affected by this issue. If only the cause of it were no longer alive—part of the cause, at least, the adulteress. The lecherous king is away from here, which puts him beyond my aim and anything I could do to him. But she, the adulteress, I can keep close. If she were burned at the stake A punishment for treason against the king. burned at the stake , perhaps I would have some small bit of rest. Who’s there?"
My lord?,My lord?
How does the boy?,How is the boy doing?
He took good rest to-night; ’Tis hoped his sickness is discharged.,"He slept well tonight, and we hope that he’s gotten over his illness."
"To see his nobleness! He straight declined, droop’d, took it deeply, Fasten’d and fix’d the shame on’t in himself, Threw off his spirit, his appetite, his sleep, And downright languish’d. Leave me solely: go,","I’m amazed at his nobility! Recognizing the dishonorable behavior of his mother, he immediately began to decline, to feel the shame himself. He became sad, stopped eating, stopped sleeping, and grew weak. Leave me alone, and go see how he’s doing."
"Fie, fie! no thought of him: The thought of my revenges that way Recoil upon me: in himself too mighty, And in his parties, his alliance; let him be Take it on her. Camillo and Polixenes Laugh at me, make their pastime at my sorrow: They should not laugh if I could reach them, nor Shall she within my power.","No! I won’t think about Polixenes. I fear taking revenge on him. He himself is too powerful, and he has powerful allies. Let him be until an opportunity comes. I’ll have revenge now on her. Camillo and Polixenes laugh at me, and find amusement in my sorrow. They wouldn’t laugh if I could reach them, and neither will the woman who is within my power to punish."
You must not enter.,You must not go in.
"Nay, rather, good my lords, be second to me: Fear you his tyrannous passion more, alas, Than the queen’s life? a gracious innocent soul, More free than he is jealous.","No, my good lords, back me. Do you fear his tyrannical anger more than the queen’s life? She’s a gracious, innocent soul, more innocent than he is jealous."
That’s enough.,That’s enough.
"Madam, he hath not slept tonight; commanded None should come at him.","Madam, he hasn’t slept tonight and has ordered that he be left alone."
"Not so hot, good sir: I come to bring him sleep. ’Tis such as you, At each his needless heavings, such as you Nourish the cause of his awaking: I Do come with words as medicinal as true, Honest as either, to purge him of that humour","Not so hasty, good sir. I’m here to bring him sleep. It’s people like you who creep softly around him like shadows and sigh at his unnecessary agitation that feed the cause of his wakefulness. I have something to say to him that’s as soothing as it is true, and honest as well, that will rid him of the sickness keeping him from rest."
"What noise there, ho?",What is that noise?
"No noise, my lord; but needful conference About some gossips for your highness.","It’s not noise, my lord, but necessary talk about godparents for your highness."
How! I charged thee that she should not come about me: I knew she would.,"What! Take this bold woman away! Antigonus, I told you to keep her away from me, because I knew she would come."
"I told her so, my lord, On your displeasure’s peril and on mine,","My lord, I told her that she shouldn’t visit you, or she’d risk making us both angry."
"What, canst not rule her?","What, you can’t control her?"
"From all dishonesty he can: in this, Unless he take the course that you have done, Commit me for committing honour, trust it,","He can keep me from dishonesty. Unless he does as you’ve done and locks me up for being honorable, he won’t control me in this matter."
"La you now, you hear: When she will take the rein I let her run; But she’ll not stumble.","You see, when she wants to take control I give her room, but she’ll do what’s right."
"Good my liege, I come; Myself your loyal servant, your physician, Your most obedient counsellor, yet that dare Less appear so in comforting your evils, Than such as most seem yours: I say, I come","My good lord, I beg you to listen to me. I’m your loyal servant, your doctor, your most obedient advisor, though perhaps I don’t seem like it because I won’t condone your evil actions, as do those servants who only seem most loyal. I come from your good queen."
Good queen!,Good queen!
"Good queen, my lord, Good queen; I say good queen; And would by combat make her good, so were I","She is a good queen, my lord. I say she is a good queen, a very good queen. If I were a man I would fight a duel to prove her innocence, even against the most lowly man."
Force her hence.,Force her out of here.
"Let him that makes but trifles of his eyes First hand me: on mine own accord I’ll off; But first I’ll do my errand. The good queen, Here ’tis; commends it to your blessing.","The first man who tries to manhandle me better not value his eyes. I’ll go by my own accord, but first I’ll carry out my errand. The good queen, for she is good, has given birth to a daughter. Here she is. She commends her to you so that you may bless her."
"Out! A mankind witch! Hence with her, out o’ door: A most intelligencing bawd!",Get out! This furious witch! Take her out of here! She’s a spying pimp!
"I am as ignorant in that as you In so entitling me, and no less honest Than you are mad; which is enough, I’ll warrant, As this world goes, to pass for honest.","Not at all. I know nothing about that, while you show your knowledge of it by calling me that name. I’m as honest as you are mad, which, I assure you, is as honest as you can expect in this world."
"Will you not push her out? Give her the bastard. Thou dotard! thou art woman-tired, unroosted By thy dame Partlet here. Take up the bastard; Take’t up, I say; give’t to thy crone.","Traitors! Won’t you shove her out? Hand her the bastard child! You dolt! You are hen-pecked and kicked out of your place of authority by your hen here. Pick up that bastard. Pick it up, I say, and give it to your hag."
"Unvenerable be thy hands, if thou Takest up the princess by that forced baseness Which he has put upon’t!",(to Antigonus) Your hands will forever be unworthy of respect if you take up the princess under that terrible name he called her!
He dreads his wife.,He fears his wife.
You’ld call your children yours.,"I wish you did, too, and then you would undoubtedly call your children your own."
A nest of traitors!,A nest of traitors!
"I am none, by this good light.",I’m not one.
"Nor I, nor any The sacred honour of himself, his queen’s, His hopeful son’s, his babe’s, betrays to slander, Whose sting is sharper than the sword’s; and will not— He cannot be compell’d to’t—once remove The root of his opinion, which is rotten As ever oak or stone was sound.","Nor am I, nor is anyone else here other than himself, since he has betrayed his own honor, the honor of his wife, of his son, and of his baby with slander, which is sharper than any sword. It’s a curse that he can’t be forced to revise his opinion, which is as rotten as oak or stone is solid."
"A callat And now baits me! This brat is none of mine; It is the issue of Polixenes: Hence with it, and together with the dam Commit them to the fire!","A constantly chattering harlot, who has recently beat her husband and now provokes me. This brat isn’t mine—it’s Polixenes’s child. Take it away, and send it and its mother to the fire!"
"And, might we lay the old proverb to your charge, So like you, ’tis the worse. Behold, my lords, Although the print be little, the whole matter And copy of the father, eye, nose, lip, The pretty dimples of his chin and cheek, His smiles, The very mould and frame of hand, nail, finger: And thou, good goddess Nature, which hast made it The ordering of the mind too, ’mongst all colours No yellow in’t, lest she suspect, as he does, Her children not her husband’s!","It is yours. It looks so much like you, and for the worse, as the proverb puts it. See, my lords, how the baby has all the features of her father in miniature: the eyes, nose, lips, her father’s frown and forehead, the dimples on his chin and cheeks, his smile. They have the same hands, nails, fingers. And so good goddess Nature has made the baby just like the man who conceived her. If Nature has control over temperament, too, don’t let her have any jealousy, or she’ll suspect, as her father does, that her children are not her husband’s!"
[to Antigonus] A gross hag That wilt not stay her tongue.,"(to Antigonus) A horrible woman. Scoundrel, you ought to be hanged for not stopping her from speaking."
"Hang all the husbands That cannot do that feat, you’ll leave yourself Hardly one subject.","If you hang all the husbands who can’t keep their wives from talking, you’ll have hardly any subjects left."
"Once more, take her hence.","Once again, get her out of here."
A most unworthy and unnatural lord Can do no more.,A most unworthy and unnatural lord can do only that.
I’ll ha’ thee burnt.,I’ll have you burnt.
"I care not: Not she which burns in’t. I’ll not call you tyrant; But this most cruel usage of your queen, Not able to produce more accusation Than your own weak-hinged fancy, something savours Yea, scandalous to the world.","I don’t care. It would be a heretic building the fire, not the woman burning in it. I won’t call you a tyrant, but your cruel mistreatment of your queen seems something like tyranny, since you can’t produce any evidence beyond your own weak imaginings. It will make you dishonorable, even scandalous, to all the world."
"On your allegiance, Out of the chamber with her! Were I a tyrant, Where were her life? she durst not call me so,","Be loyal to me and take her out of the room! If I were a tyrant, would she still be alive? If she knew I was a tyrant, truly, she wouldn’t dare call me one. Take her away!"
"I pray you, do not push me; I’ll be gone. Look to your babe, my lord; ’tis yours: Jove send her A better guiding spirit! What needs these hands? Will never do him good, not one of you. So, so: farewell; we are gone.","Please don’t push me. I’ll go. Look at your baby, my lord. She’s yours. May Jove send her a better protector! (to attendants) Why do you put your hands on me? All of you who are so accepting of his misbehavior won’t do him any good, not one of you. So, goodbye, I’m going."
"[to Antigonus] Thou, traitor, hast set on thy wife to this. My child? away with’t! Even thou, that hast And see it instantly consumed with fire; Even thou and none but thou. Take it up straight: Within this hour bring me word ’tis done, And by good testimony, or I’ll seize thy life, And wilt encounter with my wrath, say so; The bastard brains with these my proper hands Shall I dash out. Go, take it to the fire; For thou set’st on thy wife.","(to Antigonus) You traitor! You put your wife up to this. My child? Get rid of it! You, who have such a tender heart for it, take it away and see that it’s burned immediately. You, and no one but you. Do it now. Within the hour I want to hear that it is done, and with witnesses, or I’ll have your life, and all else that you call your own. If you refuse and will face my anger, say so. I’ll dash the bastard’s brains out with my own hands. Go, take it to the fire, since you put your wife up to this."
"These lords, my noble fellows, if they please, Can clear me in’t.","I didn’t, sir. These lords, my noble fellows, will clear my name."
"We can: my royal liege, He is not guilty of her coming hither.","We can, my royal lord. He isn’t responsible for her appearance here."
You’re liars all.,You are all liars.
"Beseech your highness, give us better credit: We have always truly served you, and beseech you So to esteem of us, and on our knees we beg, As recompense of our dear services Which being so horrible, so bloody, must Lead on to some foul issue: we all kneel.","Please, your highness, we are more honorable than that. We have always served you faithfully and beg you to think of us that way. We beg you on our knees, as repayment for all our services of the past and future, that you’ll change your mind. This plan is so horrible and bloody that it can only lead to something terrible."
"I am a feather for each wind that blows: Shall I live on to see this bastard kneel Than curse it then. But be it; let it live. It shall not neither. You, sir, come you hither; You that have been so tenderly officious With Lady Margery, your midwife there, So sure as this beard’s grey, —what will you adventure To save this brat’s life?","I am asked to follow every opinion I hear. Should I allow this bastard to grow up and call me father? I’d rather burn it now than curse it then. But, fine, let it live. (to Anitogonus) You, sir, come here. You have interfered so kindly along with your wench in order to save this bastard’s life—and I’m as certain it’s a bastard as I am that your beard is gray—so what will you risk to save the brat’s life?"
"Any thing, my lord, And nobleness impose: at least thus much: I’ll pawn the little blood which I have left To save the innocent: any thing possible.",Anything that my ability will allow and that nobility would demand. I’d give what little blood I might have left to save this innocent child. I’ll do whatever is possible.
It shall be possible. Swear by this sword,It will be possible. Swear by this sword that you will do what I demand.
"I will, my lord.","I will, my lord."
"Mark and perform it, see’st thou! for the fail Of any point in’t shall not only be Death to thyself but to thy lewd-tongued wife, As thou art liege-man to us, that thou carry This female bastard hence and that thou bear it To some remote and desert place quite out Of our dominions, and that there thou leave it, And favour of the climate. As by strange fortune It came to us, I do in justice charge thee, On thy soul’s peril and thy body’s torture, That thou commend it strangely to some place","Make note of what I tell you, and perform it, because if you fail to do any part of it not only will you die, but so will your crudely outspoken wife, whom I’ll pardon for now. I command you, as my loyal servant, to take this female bastard away to some deserted place far from my kingdom, and to leave it there without mercy, left to its own abilities and the whims of the weather. Since it came to me because of a foreigner, it is only just that I order you, on pain of death and torture, to take it to a foreign place where luck might nurture or kill it. Pick it up."
"I swear to do this, though a present death Had been more merciful. Come on, poor babe: Some powerful spirit instruct the kites and ravens To be thy nurses! Wolves and bears, they say Like offices of pity. Sir, be prosperous In more than this deed does require! And blessing Against this cruelty fight on thy side, Poor thing, condemn’d to loss!","I swear to carry out your orders, though killing her right now would have been more merciful. Come on, poor baby. May some powerful angel call on the vultures and ravens to take care of you. They say that wolves and bears have given up their savageness to perform similar acts of pity. Sir, be prosperous in more ways than this act deserves! (to the baby) And may a prayer against this cruel act help you, poor thing, condemned to die!"
Another’s issue.,"No, I won’t raise another man’s child."
"Please your highness, posts From those you sent to the oracle are come An hour since: Cleomenes and Dion, Hasting to the court.","Your highness, messages from the men you sent to the oracle arrived an hour ago. Cleomenes and Dion have both arrived safely from Delphos and are hurrying here to the court."
"So please you, sir, their speed Hath been beyond account.",Their speed is astonishing.
"Twenty-three days The great Apollo suddenly will have The truth of this appear. Prepare you, lords; Summon a session, that we may arraign Our most disloyal lady, for, as she hath A just and open trial. While she lives My heart will be a burthen to me. Leave me, And think upon my bidding.","They’ve been gone twenty-three days. Their speedy return predicts that great Apollo wants the truth of this matter revealed. Prepare yourselves, lords. Convene an open trial for this disloyal lady. Since she was publicly accused, she’ll have an open and just trial. While she lives my heart is heavy. Leave me, and consider my orders."
"The climate’s delicate, the air most sweet, Fertile the isle, the temple much surpassing The common praise it bears.","Delphos’s climate is exquisite, the air very sweet, the island fertile, and the temple is even more beautiful than people say."
"I shall report, Methinks I so should term them, and the reverence Of the grave wearers. O, the sacrifice! How ceremonious, solemn and unearthly It was i’ the offering!","What most charmed me were the divine clothes and the great respect held by the wise men who wore them. And the sacrifice! The offering was so ceremonious, solemn, and otherworldly!"
"And the ear-deafening voice o’ the oracle, Kin to Jove’s thunder, so surprised my sense. That I was nothing.","Of everything, the sudden and deafening voice of the oracle, like a clap of thunder, shocked me most and made me feel like I was nothing."
"If the event o’ the journey As it hath been to us rare, pleasant, speedy, The time is worth the use on’t.","If only the outcome of the journey is as successful for the queen as it was wonderful, pleasant, and quick for us, it would be a worthwhile trip."
"Great Apollo Turn all to the best! These proclamations, I little like.",May great Apollo make all turn out well! I don’t like these claims accusing Hermione of faults.
"The violent carriage of it Will clear or end the busine when the oracle, Thus by Apollo’s great divine seal’d up, Even then will rush to knowledge. Go: fresh horses! And gracious be the issue! Exeunt.","The rash way it has been conducted will either clear up this business or end it. This judgment, sealed by Apollo’s priest, will reveal some wonderful knowledge to us once it is open."
"This sessions, to our great grief we pronounce, Even pushes ’gainst our heart: the party tried The daughter of a king, our wife, and one Of us too much beloved. Let us be clear’d Proceed in justice, which shall have due course, Even to the guilt or the purgation. Produce the prisoner.","We call this session with great grief and heartache. The defendant is the daughter of a king, my wife, and one I have loved too much. Let me be cleared of acting like a tyrant, since I have been so open about this course of justice, whether it end in guilt or acquittal. Bring out the prisoner."
It is his highness’ pleasure that the queen,It is the king’s request that the queen appear in person in the courtroom. Silence!
Read the indictment.,Read the indictment.
"[Reads] Hermione, queen to the worthy Leontes, king of Sicilia, thou art here accused and arraigned of high treason, in committing adultery with Camillo to take away the life of our sovereign lord the king, thy royal husband: the pretence whereof being by circumstances partly laid open, thou, Hermione, contrary to the faith and allegiance their better safety, to fly away by night.","(reads) Hermione, queen of the worthy Leontes, king of Sicilia, you are accused and arraigned for high treason, for committing adultery with Polixenes, king of Bohemia, and conspiring with Camillo to kill our sovereign king, your royal husband. Then, when the plot was accidentally discovered, you, Hermione, against the duty and faith of a loyal subject, advised them to flee by night for safety, and helped them to leave."
"Since what I am to say must be but that Which contradicts my accusation and The testimony on my part no other To say ‘not guilty:’ mine integrity Being counted falsehood, shall, as I express it, Be so received. But thus: if powers divine Behold our human actions, as they do, False accusation blush and tyranny Tremble at patience. You, my lord, best know, Who least will seem to do so, my past life Hath been as continent, as chaste, as true, Than history can pattern, though devised And play’d to take spectators. For behold me A fellow of the royal bed, which owe A moiety of the throne a great king’s daughter, To prate and talk for life and honour ’fore Who please to come and hear. For life, I prize it As I weigh grief, which I would spare: for honour, ’Tis a derivative from me to mine, To your own conscience, sir, before Polixenes Came to your court, how I was in your grace, How merited to be so; since he came, With what encounter so uncurrent I The bound of honour, or in act or will That way inclining, harden’d be the hearts Of all that hear me, and my near’st of kin Cry fie upon my grave!","Since what I’m going to say must contradict this accusation and the only testimony in my favor comes from me, it hardly helps to say “not guilty.” I’m believed to be a liar, so whatever I say will be considered false. But if the gods watch what we humans do, I don’t doubt that innocence will win out against false accusation and tyranny. You, my lord, know that my past life has been faithful, pure, and true, though you seem to know this least of anyone. Those qualities are now matched by my unhappiness, which is greater than history has ever seen, even if it were created and performed to enthrall an audience. Look at me, who has slept in the royal bed, who owns part of the throne as the daughter of a great king, the mother of the prince who will one day take the throne, forced to defend my life and my honor in front of anyone who cares to come and hear. I care as much for life as I do for grief, which I could do without. Honor, though, is passed down from me to my children, so I will make a stand for that. I appeal to your conscience to remember how you held me in good graces before Polixenes came to court, and how I deserved to be regarded so. Since he came to court, think of what was so unacceptable about my behavior that I now appear on trial. If I have acted in any way dishonorably, or even seemed inclined to do so, may all that hear me harden their hearts, and may even my closest relatives curse my grave!"
That any of these bolder vices wanted Less impudence to gainsay what they did Than to perform it first.,The same audacity that allows someone to perform a terrible deed also lets her deny it.
That’s true enough;,"That’s true enough, but that has nothing to do with me."
You will not own it.,You won’t admit it.
"More than mistress of Which comes to me in name of fault, I must not At all acknowledge. For Polixenes, I loved him as in honour he required, With such a kind of love as might become A lady like me, with a love even such, So and no other, as yourself commanded: Both disobedience and ingratitude To you and toward your friend, whose love had spoke, Even since it could speak, from an infant, freely That it was yours. Now, for conspiracy, For me to try how: all I know of it Is that Camillo was an honest man; And why he left your court, the gods themselves, Wotting no more than I, are ignorant.","I take full ownership of my faults, but I won’t acknowledge any faults that aren’t mine. I confess that I loved Polixenes in the manner his honor required, and with a love that was befitting a lady like me—with such a love, even, as you yourself commanded. If I hadn’t love him in this way, I would have been disobeying you and showing ingratitude to both you and your friend, who has loved you since childhood. Now, as for conspiracy, I don’t even know what it is like, even if it is being aimed at me. All I know is that Camillo was an honest man, and the gods know as little as I do about why he left your court."
What you have underta’en to do in’s absence.,"You knew that he was leaving, and you know what you have tried to do in his absence."
"Sir, You speak a language that I understand not: My life stands in the level of your dreams,","Sir, I don’t understand what you are saying. I’ll give up my life, which is the target of your delusions."
"Your actions are my dreams; You had a bastard by Polixenes, And I but dream’d it. As you were past all shame,— Those of your fact are so—so past all truth: Thy brat hath been cast out, like to itself, No father owning it,—which is, indeed, More criminal in thee than it,—so thou Shalt feel our justice, in whose easiest passage","My “delusions” are made of your actions. You had a bastard child with Polixenes—maybe I just dreamed it! You are past any shame, as women like you are, or any truth. Just as I’ve cast out your brat, whose lack of a father is more your fault than the child’s, I’ll devise a punishment for you, the least of which will be death."
"Sir, spare your threats: The bug which you would fright me with I seek. To me can life be no commodity: The crown and comfort of my life, your favour, But know not how it went. My second joy And first-fruits of my body, from his presence I am barr’d, like one infectious. My third comfort Starr’d most unluckily, is from my breast, Haled out to murder: myself on every post Proclaimed a strumpet: with immodest hatred The child-bed privilege denied, which ’longs To women of all fashion; lastly, hurried I have got strength of limit. Now, my liege, Tell me what blessings I have here alive, That I should fear to die? Therefore proceed. But yet hear this: mistake me not; no life, Which I would free, if I shall be condemn’d Upon surmises, all proofs sleeping else But what your jealousies awake, I tell you ’Tis rigor and not law. Your honours all, Apollo be my judge!","Sir, save your threats. I’d seek out the terrible punishment you threaten me with. Life has no value for me now. Having your favor was my highest goal and my comfort, and I give it up as lost now, though I don’t know how. My second joy in life, my first son, is kept from me as though I have a disease. My third comfort, that unlucky child with the innocent milk still in its innocent mouth, has been taken from my breast and dragged out to be murdered. I’ve been publicly declared a whore, with outrageous hatred denied the rest after childbirth that all women of my rank deserve, and hurried here into the open air before I’ve regained my strength. Now, my lord, tell me what I have to live for, and why I should fear death. Go ahead. But listen to what I say, which I say not for the sake of my life but for my honor: if I am condemned on mere guesses and your jealousy without any proof, it is merely severity and not justice. Your honors, I commend myself to the oracle, and let Apollo be my judge!"
"This your request Is altogether just: therefore bring forth, And in Apollos name, his oracle.",Your request is just. Bring forth the oracle of Apollo.
"O that he were alive, and here beholding His daughter’s trial! that he did but see The flatness of my misery, yet with eyes Of pity, not revenge!","If only my father, the Emperor of Russia, were alive and could be here to see his daughter’s trial! If only he could see my misery with eyes of pity, not revenge!"
"That you, Cleomenes and Dion, have Been both at Delphos, and from thence have brought The seal’d-up oracle, by the hand deliver’d Of great Apollo’s priest; and that, since then, Nor read the secrets in’t.","You will swear upon this sword of justice that you, Cleomenes and Dion, have both been at Delphos and have brought back with you the sealed oracle, delivered by great Apollo’s priest, and that you have not broken the holy seal nor read the secrets in it."
All this we swear.,We swear all this.
Break up the seals and read.,Break the seal and read.
"[Reads] Hermione is chaste; a jealous tyrant; his innocent babe truly begotten; and the king shall live without an heir, if that which is lost be not found.","(reads) Hermione is chaste, Polixenes is innocent, Camillo is a loyal subject, Leontes is a jealous tyrant, and his innocent baby is legitimately born. The king will live without an heir if the baby that was lost is not found."
Now blessed be the great Apollo!,Blessed be the great Apollo!
Praised!,Praise him!
Hast thou read truth?,Have you read the truth?
"Ay, my lord; even so As it is here set down.","Yes, my lord, exactly as it is written here."
There is no truth at all i’ the oracle:,There is no truth in what the oracle says. The trial will proceed. These are simply lies.
"My lord the king, the king!",My lord the king!
What is the business?,What’s going on?
"O sir, I shall be hated to report it! The prince your son, with mere conceit and fear","Sir, you’ll hate me when I tell you! The prince, your son, imagining and fearing the queen’s fate, is gone."
How! gone!,"What, gone?"
Is dead.,He’s dead.
Apollo’s angry; and the heavens themselves Do strike at my injustice.,"Apollo is angry, and the heavens themselves strike back at my injustice."
How now there!,What now?
This news is mortal to the queen: look down And see what death is doing.,The news is deadly to the queen. Look at her and see how she is dying.
"Take her hence: Her heart is but o’ercharged; she will recover: Beseech you, tenderly apply to her Some remedies for life.","Take her out of here. She’s just overwhelmed, she’ll get better. I’ve believed too firmly in my own suspicions. Please, give her something to help her recover."
"Apollo, pardon My great profaneness ’gainst thine oracle! New woo my queen, recall the good Camillo, Whom I proclaim a man of truth, of mercy; For, being transported by my jealousies To bloody thoughts and to revenge, I chose My friend Polixenes: which had been done, But that the good mind of Camillo tardied My swift command, though I with death and with Reward did threaten and encourage him, And fill’d with honour, to my kingly guest Unclasp’d my practise, quit his fortunes here, Which you knew great, and to the hazard Of all encertainties himself commended, Thorough my rust! and how his pity Does my deeds make the blacker!","Apollo, forgive how I have insulted your oracle! I’ll make it up to Polixenes, court my queen again, and call back good Camillo, whom I declare an honest and merciful man. When I was made mad by my jealousies and plotted bloody revenge, I asked Camillo to poison my friend Polixenes. It would have been done if Camillo hadn’t delayed doing it, even though I threatened to kill him if he didn’t and to reward him if he did. Even so, he was so humane and honorable that he revealed my plot, left his great fortunes here, and giving himself over to uncertainty, departed with only his honor. How much finer he appears next to me! And how his good deeds make my actions seem even worse!"
"Woe the while! O, cut my lace, lest my heart, cracking it,","Alas! Cut my corset, so that my heart, in cracking through it, won’t break as well."
"What fit is this, good lady?","What is wrong, good lady?"
"What studied torments, tyrant, hast for me? What wheels? racks? fires? what flaying? boiling? In leads or oils? what old or newer torture To taste of thy most worst? Thy tyranny Together working with thy jealousies, Fancies too weak for boys, too green and idle For girls of nine, O, think what they have done Thy by-gone fooleries were but spices of it. That thou betray’dst Polixenes, ’twas nothing; That did but show thee, of a fool, inconstant And damnable ingrateful: nor was’t much, To have him kill a king: poor trespasses, More monstrous standing by: whereof I reckon The casting forth to crows thy baby-daughter To be or none or little; though a devil Nor is’t directly laid to thee, the death Of the young prince, whose honourable thoughts, Thoughts high for one so tender, cleft the heart That could conceive a gross and foolish sire Laid to thy answer: but the last,—O lords, When I have said, cry ‘woe!’ the queen, the queen, The sweet’st, dear’st creature’s dead, and vengeance for’t","How have you decided to torment me, tyrant? With wheels, racks, fires, or flaying? With lead or oil? All are forms of torture. wheels, racks, fires, or flaying? With lead or oil? What old or new torture must I receive, since my every word deserves the worst you could give me? Think of what your jealousy—which is too silly even for boys, and too immature and foolish for a nine-year-old girl—together with your tyranny has done, and then you’ll go mad! All of your earlier insanities were just a foretaste of this. Your betrayal of Polixenes was nothing—it just showed you to be a fickle and ungrateful fool. Neither was it much that you tried to tarnish Camillo’s honor by commissioning him to assassinate a king. These are just small misdeeds, with a more monstrous one waiting. I suppose the fact that you threw your baby daughter to the crows is little or nothing beside this, even though a devil would have shed tears from his fiery eyes before he did that. And the death of the young prince isn’t directly your fault. His heart tore in two at the thought that his gracious mother had been so disgraced by his vulgar and foolish father. This is not the worst act you’ll have to answer for. But this last deed—Oh, lords, when I have told you to grieve, it is because the queen, that dearest, sweetest creature, is dead, and she has not yet been avenged."
The higher powers forbid!,The gods forbid!
"I say she’s dead; I’ll swear’t. If word nor oath Prevail not, go and see: if you can bring Tincture or lustre in her lip, her eye, As I would do the gods. But, O thou tyrant! Do not repent these things, for they are heavier Than all thy woes can stir; therefore betake thee To nothing but despair. A thousand knees Upon a barren mountain and still winter In storm perpetual, could not move the gods To look that way thou wert.","I swear that she is dead. If my word and oath don’t convince you, go look. If you can bring any color or life to her lip or her eye, warm her body or cause her to breathe again, I’ll serve you as I would serve the gods. But, oh, you tyrant! Don’t try to repent now, because all your sorrow won’t change it. All you can do now is despair. If you had ten thousand years to spend naked, on your knees, fasting on a barren, wintry mountain in perpetual storms, the gods wouldn’t take pity on you."
"Go on, go on All tongues to talk their bitterest.","Go on, you can’t say too much. I’ve deserved all the bitterest words people can say."
"Say no more: Howe’er the business goes, you have made fault I’ the boldness of your speech.","Don’t say any more. However it happened, you are wrong to speak so boldly."
"All faults I make, when I shall come to know them, I do repent. Alas! I have show’d too much The rashness of a woman: he is touch’d To the noble heart. What’s gone and what’s past help At my petition; I beseech you, rather Let me be punish’d, that have minded you Of what you should forget. Now, good my liege Sir, royal sir, forgive a foolish woman: I’ll speak of her no more, nor of your children; I’ll not remember you of my own lord, Who is lost too: take your patience to you, And I’ll say nothing.","I’m sorry for it. I always repent for my faults once I am aware of them. Alas! I have been too rash, and he feels it in his heart. What has happened and can’t be fixed should be past grieving over. Don’t let my words make you feel bad. I beg you, instead, to punish me for reminding you of what you should forget. Now, my good and royal sir, forgive a foolish woman. The love I had for your queen—ah, I’m behaving like a fool again!—I won’t speak about her anymore, or of your children, and I won’t remind you of my husband, who is gone, too. Be patient, and I’ll be quiet."
"When most the truth; which I receive much better Than to be pitied of thee. Prithee, bring me To the dead bodies of my queen and son: One grave shall be for both: upon them shall Our shame perpetual. Once a day I’ll visit The chapel where they lie, and tears shed there Shall be my recreation: so long as nature Will bear up with this exercise, so long Unto these sorrows. Exeunt","You spoke best when you told the truth, and I prefer it to being pitied. Please, take me to the dead bodies of my queen and son. I’ll bury them in one grave, and I’ll inscribe their gravestone with the cause of their death, to memorialize my shame. I’ll visit the chapel where they lie daily, and my pastime will be to shed tears. I’ll do it daily, as long as I am able to. Come, take me to this sorrowful sight."
"Thou art perfect then, our ship hath touch’d upon The deserts of Bohemia?",You are sure that our ship has landed at the desert of Bohemia?
"Ay, my lord: and fear We have landed in ill time: the skies look grimly The heavens with that we have in hand are angry And frown upon ’s.","Yes, my lord, and I fear we’ve landed at a bad time. The sky is dark, and it looks as though a storm approaches. It seems to me that the heavens are angry at what we are about to do and are unhappy with us."
"Their sacred wills be done! Go, get aboard; Look to thy bark: I’ll not be long before","Let their sacred will be done! Go aboard, and see to your ship. I’ll call for you shortly."
"Make your best haste, and go not Too far i’ the land: ’tis like to be loud weather; Besides, this place is famous for the creatures Of prey that keep upon’t.","Go as quickly as you can, and don’t venture too far inland. It promises to be a dreadful storm, and this area is famous for its predators."
I’ll follow instantly.,Go away. I’ll be right behind you.
I am glad at heart To be so rid o’ the business.,I’m happy to be done with this business.
"Come, poor babe: the spirits o’ the dead May walk again: if such thing be, thy mother Appear’d to me last night, for ne’er was dream So like a waking. To me comes a creature, I never saw a vessel of like sorrow, So fill’d and so becoming: in pure white robes, Like very sanctity, she did approach My cabin where I lay; thrice bow’d before me, Became two spouts: the fury spent, anon Did this break-from her: ‘Good Antigonus, Since fate, against thy better disposition, Hath made thy person for the thrower-out Places remote enough are in Bohemia, There weep and leave it crying; and, for the babe Is counted lost for ever, Perdita, I prithee, call’t. For this ungentle business Thy wife Paulina more.’ And so, with shrieks She melted into air. Affrighted much, I did in time collect myself and thought This was so and no slumber. Dreams are toys: I will be squared by this. I do believe Hermione hath suffer’d death, and that Apollo would, this being indeed the issue Of King Polixenes, it should here be laid, Of its right father. Blossom, speed thee well! There lie, and there thy character: there these; Which may, if fortune please, both breed thee, pretty, And still rest thine. The storm begins; poor wretch, To loss and what may follow! Weep I cannot, But my heart bleeds; and most accursed am I To be by oath enjoin’d to this. Farewell! The day frowns more and more: thou’rt like to have The heavens so dim by day. A savage clamour! Well may I get aboard! This is the chase: I am gone for ever.","Come, poor child. I’ve heard but never believed that the spirits of the dead might walk the earth. But perhaps it is true, because last night your mother appeared to me, and no dream ever seemed so real. She comes to me with her head to one side or the other, and I’ve never seen anyone so filled with sorrow and so beautiful. Dressed in pure white robes, she came to my room where I was resting. She bowed three times to me, and struggling to speak, she broke into tears. Once her fury was spent, these words came out: “Good Antigonus, since fate, against your good nature, has chosen you to cast out my child according to your oath, leave her in the remote places of Bohemia. There you weep, and leave the child crying. Since she is lost forever, I ask you to call her Perdita Latin for “lost one.” Perdita . Because of this terrible business forced upon you, you will never see your wife Paulina again.” And then she disappeared, shrieking. Very frightened, I finally got myself together and decided it had truly happened and wasn’t a dream. Dreams are just trifles, but for this once, even if it’s superstition, I’ll be ruled by one. I believe that Hermione has died, and that this child is truly the child of King Polixenes, so Apollo would want her to be left, whether to life or death, on the land of her real father. Blossom, fare you well! (he lays down the child and a scroll) Lie there, and I’ll put an account of your parentage with you. (he puts down a box) These jewels and gold will help pay for your upbringing, and if fortune pleases, leave some left over for you. (thunder) The storm is beginning. Poor child, because of your mother’s transgressions you are left out to die! I can’t weep, but my heart bleeds, and I’m cursed for having to do this deed. Farewell! The day gets worse and worse. You are likely to be lulled to sleep with a rough lullaby. I’ve never seen the sky look so dark during the day. What a savage noise! I’ll be lucky to get on board! This is the hunt! I’m gone forever."
"I would there were no age between sixteen and rest; for there is nothing in the between but getting wenches with child, wronging the ancientry, stealing, fighting—Hark you now! Would any but these boiled brains of nineteen and two-and-twenty best sheep, which I fear the wolf will sooner find than the master: if any where I have them, ’tis by the seaside, browsing of ivy. Good luck, an’t be thy will what have we here! Mercy on ’s, a barne a very pretty one; a very pretty one: sure, some ’scape: though I am not bookish, yet I can read waiting-gentlewoman in the ’scape. This has been some stair-work, some trunk-work, some than the poor thing is here. I’ll take it up for pity: yet I’ll tarry till my son come; he hallooed but even now. Whoa, ho, hoa!","I wish that the ages between sixteen and twenty-three didn’t exist, or that young men would spend them asleep. Otherwise there is nothing between those ages but getting girls pregnant, acting dishonestly toward their elders, stealing, fighting—look at this! Would anyone but an addlebrained nineteen or twenty-two-year-old hunt in this weather? They’ve scared away two of my best sheep, which I’m afraid the wolf will find before I do. If I find them anywhere it’ll be by the shore, eating ivy. What is this here? Mercy, it’s a baby, a pretty baby! A boy or a girl, I wonder? A pretty one, a very pretty one. Here is the product of some forbidden affair. I’m not a scholar, but I can read the signs of a lady-in-waiting behind this. It must have been some secret sexual relationship carried out in back stairs, in large chests, or behind closed doors. The man and woman who conceived this child were more hot-blooded than the poor baby is. Out of pity I’ll take it, but I’ll wait here until my son comes. I heard him shout just a moment ago. Hallo!"
"Hilloa, loa!",Hallo!
"on when thou art dead and rotten, come hither. What ailest thou, man?","What, are you near? If you want to see something to talk about when you are dead and rotten, come here. What is wrong with you?"
"I have seen two such sights, by sea and by land! but I am not to say it is a sea, for it is now the a bodkin’s point.","I’ve seen two such sights, on sea and on land! But I won’t say it is a sea, since the sky is just as wet from the storm. You couldn’t squeeze a needle’s point between the sky and the sea."
"Why, boy, how is it?","Why, boy, what’s happening there?"
"I would you did but see how it chafes, how it rages, how it takes up the shore! but that’s not the sometimes to see ’em, and not to see ’em; now the ship boring the moon with her main-mast, and anon swallowed with yest and froth, as you’ld thrust a cork into a hogshead. And then for the shoulder-bone; how he cried to me for help and said his name was Antigonus, a nobleman. But to make an end of the ship, to see how the sea flap-dragoned it: but, first, how the poor souls roared, and the and the bear mocked him, both roaring louder than the sea or weather.","I wish you could see how it rages and rushes up the shore! But that’s not the point. Oh, the pitiful cries of the men, coming in and out of sight. Then the ship would rise up so its mast looked like it hit the moon, and the next moment it was swallowed by the frothing waves. And then on land, I saw how the bear tore out his shoulder, and he cried to me for help. He said his name was Antigonus, and he was a nobleman. But to finish telling you about the ship, you should have seen how the sea swallowed it up. But first the poor men roared, and the sea mocked them, and then the poor gentleman roared, and the bear mocked him, and they both roared louder than either the sea or the storm."
"Name of mercy, when was this, boy?","Goodness me, when did this happen?"
"Now, now: I have not winked since I saw these the bear half dined on the gentleman: he’s at it now.","Just now—I haven’t even blinked since I saw these sights. The men aren’t yet cold under the water, and the bear has only partly dined on the gentleman—he’s still eating now."
"Would I had been by, to have helped the old man!",If only I’d been close by to help the gentleman!
"I would you had been by the ship side, to have",I wish you had been near the ship so you could have helped it—on the water you wouldn’t have had a place to stand.
"Heavy matters! heavy matters! but look thee here, boy. Now bless thyself: thou mettest with things dying, I with things newborn. Here’s a sight for thee; look thee, a bearing-cloth for a squire’s open’t. So, let’s see: it was told me I should be rich by the fairies. This is some changeling: open’t. What’s within, boy?","Sad affairs, sad affairs! But look here, boy. Say a blessing. While you were watching things dying, I was meeting with things newly born. Here’s a sight for you. Look, baby clothes for a squire’s child A squire was a man of relatively high social standing. squire’s child ! Look here, pick it up, boy, and open it. Let’s see what’s in it. I’ve been told that the fairies would make me rich. This is some changeling A child said to have been swapped for another child by fairies. changeling . Open it. What’s in it, boy?"
You’re a made old man: if the sins of your youth,"You are set, old man! As long as the sins of your youth have been forgiven, you’ll live well. It’s gold, all gold!"
"This is fairy gold, boy, and ’twill prove so: up with’t, keep it close: home, home, the next way. We are lucky, boy; and to be so still requires nothing but secrecy. Let my sheep go: come, good","This is fairy gold, boy, and will prove to be. Pick it up, and hold it close. Let’s go home. We are lucky, boy, and to keep it that way we have to keep this matter a secret. Let the sheep go. Come, good boy, let’s go home."
"Go you the next way with your findings. I’ll go see if the bear be gone from the gentleman and how much he hath eaten: they are never curst but when they are hungry: if there be any of him left, I’ll bury","Go home yourself with what you’ve found. I’ll go see if the bear has left the gentleman and how much of him he ate. They are only vicious when they are hungry. If there is anything left of the gentleman, I’ll bury it."
"That’s a good deed. If thou mayest discern by that which is left of him what he is, fetch me to the sight of him.","That’s a good deed. If you can tell by what’s left of him who he was, bring me to the body."
"Marry, will I; and you shall help to put him i’ the ground.","I will, and then you can help me bury him."
"’Tis a lucky day, boy, and we’ll do good deeds on’t.","It’s a lucky day, boy, and we’ll do good deeds to mark it."
"I, that please some, try all, both joy and terror Of good and bad, that makes and unfolds error, Now take upon me, in the name of Time, To use my wings. Impute it not a crime O’er sixteen years and leave the growth untried Of that wide gap, since it is in my power To o’erthrow law and in one self-born hour To plant and o’erwhelm custom. Let me pass Or what is now received: I witness to The times that brought them in; so shall I do To the freshest things now reigning and make stale The glistering of this present, as my tale I turn my glass and give my scene such growing As you had slept between: Leontes leaving, The effects of his fond jealousies so grieving That he shuts up himself, imagine me, In fair Bohemia, and remember well, I mentioned a son o’ the king’s, which Florizel I now name to you; and with speed so pace To speak of Perdita, now grown in grace I list not prophecy; but let Time’s news Be known when ’tis brought forth. A shepherd’s daughter, And what to her adheres, which follows after, If ever you have spent time worse ere now; If never, yet that Time himself doth say He wishes earnestly you never may.","I am taking up my wings, in the name of Time, which pleases some, tests all, brings both joy and terror, makes errors and corrects them. Don’t see it as a crime that I pass quickly over sixteen years and leave that wide gap unexamined, as I have the power to overthrow the laws of nature and, in one hour, to establish or topple custom. Let me remain as I’ve been since before civilization began through what currently is. I saw the times that led to the present, and as I did to the past, I’ll make the youngest things old and dim the shine of the present until it, too, is old. If your patience allows, I’ll turn my hourglass and move the scene forward as if you had slept through it all. Leontes mourns the terrible results of his foolish jealousy so much that he shuts himself away. Then imagine, dear spectators, that I am now in fair Bohemia, where a son of the king, named Florizel, lives. And quickly I’ll speak of Perdita, grown into a young woman so graceful she inspires admiration. I won’t prophecy what will happen to her, but let Time reveal it. She is a shepherd’s daughter, and what pertains to her is the provenance of Time. Allow this leap in time if ever before now you’ve spent time in a worse way. If you haven’t, Time himself hopes you never will."
"I pray thee, good Camillo, be no more importunate: ’tis a sickness denying thee any thing; a death to grant this.","I beg you, Camillo, stop being so persistent. It’s terrible to deny you anything, but it would be death to grant this."
"It is sixteen years since I saw my country: though desire to lay my bones there. Besides, the penitent king, my master, hath sent for me; to whose feeling sorrows I might be some allay, or I o’erween to think so, which is another spur to my departure.","It’s been sixteen years since I’ve seen my country. Although I’ve lived abroad so long, I want to be buried at home. Besides, my master, the king, regrets his actions and has sent for me. Perhaps I can ease his grief, if I’m not too presumptuous in thinking I might, and that makes my departure all the more urgent."
"thy services by leaving me now: the need I have of thee thine own goodness hath made; better not to have had thee than thus to want thee: thou, having made me businesses which none without thee can them thyself or take away with thee the very services thou hast done; which if I have not enough considered, as too much I cannot, to be more thankful to thee shall be my study, and my profit country, Sicilia, prithee speak no more; whose very naming punishes me with the remembrance of that penitent, as thou callest him, and reconciled king, my brother; whose loss of his most precious queen Say to me, when sawest thou the Prince Florizel, my son? Kings are no less unhappy, their issue not being gracious, than they are in losing them when they have approved their virtues.","If you love me, Camillo, don’t renounce the rest of your service to me by leaving me now. It’s your own excellence that makes me need you so much. It would have been better not to have known you at all than to miss you. Since you’ve managed matters here in a way that no one can do without you, you must either stay and see them through or take them with you. If I haven’t been thankful enough—and I can’t be too thankful—I’ll apply myself to it even more and find my profit in your great friendship. Please don’t speak of that deadly country, Sicilia, anymore. Its very name hurts by making me remember that remorseful—as you call him—and reconciled king, whose loss of his precious queen and children should be mourned anew even now. Tell me, when did you last see my son, Prince Florizel? Kings are just as unhappy when their children are not virtuous as when they lose them after they’ve proved their virtues."
"his happier affairs may be, are to me unknown: but I have missingly noted, he is of late much retired from court and is less frequent to his princely exercises than formerly he hath appeared.","Sir, it has been three days since I saw the prince. I don’t know what happiness he might have, but I have noticed that lately he’s more often absent from the court and neglectful of his princely duties than in the past."
"care; so far that I have eyes under my service which look upon his removedness; from whom I have this intelligence, that he is seldom from the house of a most homely shepherd; a man, they say, that from neighbours, is grown into an unspeakable estate.","I have thought about this, and with some concern, Camillo, so much so that I’ve had some of my servants keep an eye on him while he’s been absent. From them I’ve learned that he is often at the home of a simple shepherd, a man, they say, who has gone from nothing to amazing riches, greater than any of his neighbors could have imagined."
"I have heard, sir, of such a man, who hath a daughter of most rare note: the report of her is extended more than can be thought to begin from such a cottage.","I’ve heard of such a man, sir, who has a most exceptional daughter. What people say of her is beyond what one would expect to have come from such a cottage."
"fear, the angle that plucks our son thither. Thou shalt accompany us to the place; where we will, not appearing what we are, have some question with the shepherd; from whose simplicity I think it not Prithee, be my present partner in this business, and lay aside the thoughts of Sicilia.","I’ve heard the same thing, and I fear that she’s what takes my son there. You shall go with me to that place, and in disguise we’ll question the shepherd, whose simple nature I think will make it easy to find out why my son visits there. Please, be my partner in this matter and forget about Sicilia."
I willingly obey your command.,I willingly obey your command.
My best Camillo! We must disguise ourselves.,Wonderful Camillo! We must disguise ourselves.
"When daffodils begin to peer, With heigh! the doxy over the dale, Why, then comes in the sweet o’ the year; For the red blood reigns in the winter’s pale. With heigh! the sweet birds, O, how they sing! Doth set my pugging tooth on edge; For a quart of ale is a dish for a king. The lark, that tirra-lyra chants, Are summer songs for me and my aunts, While we lie tumbling in the hay. I have served Prince Florizel and in my time wore three-pile; but now I am out of service: The pale moon shines by night: And when I wander here and there, I then do most go right. If tinkers may have leave to live, Then my account I well may, give, And in the stocks avouch it. My traffic is sheets; when the kite builds, look to lesser linen. My father named me Autolycus; who a snapper-up of unconsidered trifles. With die and drab I purchased this caparison, and my revenue is the silly cheat. Gallows and knock are too powerful on the highway: beating and hanging are terrors to of it. A prize! a prize!","When daffodils begin to sprout, with the poor wench over the hills, why then it’s the sweetest part of the year as red blood reigns in flesh made pale by winter. The white sheet airing out on the hedge, and oh, the sweet birds singing, makes my thieving fingers itch, and a quart of beer is a drink for a king! The lark chants “tirra-lyra,” and the thrush and the jay sing, while my mistress and I tumble about in the hay. I have served Prince Florizel and worn three-piled velvet A luxuriously thick type of velve. three-piled velvet , but now I’m unemployed. But should I mourn for that, my dear? The pale moon shines at night, and in wandering here and there, I take the right course through life. If menders of metal pots have the right to live and bear the burden of their tool bag, then I can tell my own story and in the stocks A form of punishment in which a person was locked into a wooden device, called the stocks, in public to be exposed to ridicule the stocks . I deal in sheets, and when the thieving bird builds his nest, he takes up poorer linen. My father named me Autolycus In Greek myth, Autolycus was the grandfather of Odysseus and a cunning thief Autolycus . Like me he was born under Mercury The god of thieves. Mercury , and like me he would steal those little things left unsecured. By gambling and pimping I bought this outfit, and my income is from little deceptions. Being a highwayman might get me hanged or beat, which are terrors to me, and as for the afterlife, I try not to think about it. Oh, look—a prize!"
Let me see: every ’leven wether tods; every tod yields pound and odd shilling; fifteen hundred shorn. what comes the wool to?,"Let’s see. Every eleven sheep gives about twenty-eight pounds of wool. Every twenty-eight pounds of wool earns a pound and some shillings. If we’ve shorn fifteen hundred sheep, how much does that come to?"
"If the springe hold, the cock’s mine.","(aside) If the trap holds, the bird is mine."
"I cannot do’t without counters. Let me see; what am I to buy for our sheep-shearing feast? Three pound of sugar, five pound of currants, rice,—what will hath made her mistress of the feast, and she lays it on. She hath made me four and twenty nose-gays for the shearers, three-man-song-men all, and very good ones; but they are most of them means and bases; but horn-pipes. I must have saffron to colour the warden pies; mace; dates?—none, that’s out of my note; nutmegs, seven; a race or two of ginger, but that I may beg; four pound of prunes, and as many of","I can’t do it without something to add it up. Let’s see, what do I need to buy for our sheep-shearing feast A traditional summer event in rural England at the time. sheep-shearing feast ? Three pounds of sugar, five pounds of currants, rice. What does my sister need rice for? But my father has put her in charge of the feast, and she is doing a good job with it. She’s made twenty-four small bouquets for the shearers, who can all sing three-part songs, and very well. But they are mostly tenors and basses, and one is so saintly he sings psalms for dances. I have to get saffron to color the pear pies. Do I need mace A spice derived from the same fruit as nutmeg. mace and dates? No, that’s not on my list. Seven nutmegs, some ginger root—though I might be able to get that for free—and four pounds each of prunes and raisins."
O that ever I was born!,"Oh, that I was ever born!"
I’ the name of me—,What in the world—
"O, help me, help me! pluck but off these rags; and then, death, death!","Oh, help me! Take off these rags, and then I can die!"
"on thee, rather than have these off.","Alas, poor soul! You need more rags to cover you, not to take your rags off."
"O sir, the loathsomeness of them offends me more than the stripes I have received, which are mighty ones and millions.","Oh, sir, their awfulness offends me more than the blows I received, which were numerous and painful."
great matter.,"Alas, poor man! To have suffered a million blows is a serious problem."
"I am robbed, sir, and beaten; my money and apparel ta’en from me, and these detestable things put upon me.","I’ve been robbed, sir, and beaten, my money and clothes taken from me, and these horrible rags put on me instead."
"What, by a horseman, or a footman?","What, by a man on horse or on foot?"
"A footman, sweet sir, a footman.","A man on foot, sweet sir, on foot."
"Indeed, he should be a footman by the garments he has left with thee: if this be a horseman’s coat, it hath seen very hot service. Lend me thy hand,","Indeed, he should be a man on foot, judging by those clothes. If it were the coat of a man on a horse, it has seen some terrible service. Give me your hand, and I’ll help you. Here, give me your hand."
"O, good sir, tenderly, O!","Oh, good sir, be gentle!"
"Alas, poor soul!","Alas, poor soul!"
"O, good sir, softly, good sir! I fear, sir, my shoulder-blade is out.","Oh, good sir, carefully! I’m afraid my shoulder might be dislocated."
How now! canst stand?,What else? Can you stand?
"[Picking his pocket] Softly, dear sir; good sir, softly. You ha’ done me a charitable office.","(picking the Yokel’s pocket) Careful, dear sir, careful. You have done me a charitable deed."
Dost lack any money? I have a little money for thee.,Do you need money? I have a little I can give you.
"a kinsman not past three quarters of a mile hence, unto whom I was going; I shall there have money, or any thing I want: offer me no money, I pray you; that kills my heart.","No, good kind sir, I beg you. I have a relative less than a mile from here whom I was going to visit. He can give me money or whatever I need. Please, don’t offer me money. That kills me."
What manner of fellow was he that robbed you?,What did the fellow who robbed you look like?
"A fellow, sir, that I have known to go about with troll-my-dames; I knew him once a servant of the prince: I cannot tell, good sir, for which of his virtues it was, but he was certainly whipped out of the court.","A fellow, sir, that I have known to go about with prostitutes. I know he was once a servant of the prince. I’m not sure, good sir, for which of his virtues it was, but he certainly got whipped out of court."
out of the court: they cherish it to make it stay there; and yet it will no more but abide.,"Vices, you mean, since virtues aren’t whipped out of court. They cherish virtues there, and yet they won’t stay there long."
"Vices, I would say, sir. I know this man well: he hath been since an ape-bearer; then a motion of the Prodigal Son, and married a tinker’s wife within a mile where my land and living lies; and, having flown over many knavish professions, he settled only in rogue: some call him Autolycus.","I would say vices, sir. I know this man well. Since he left he has been a performer with a monkey, then a summons server, a bailiff, and then he came up with a puppet show about the Prodigal Son, and then he married a pot-mender’s wife within a mile of my property. Having entered and abandoned all these disreputable professions, he finally settled on being a rogue. Some call him Autolycus."
"wakes, fairs and bear-baitings.","A curse on him! A crook, upon my life, a crook. He lingers about funerals, fairs, and bear-baitings."
"Very true, sir; he, sir, he; that’s the rogue that put me into this apparel.","Very true, sir, that’s him, the rogue that put me in these clothes."
Not a more cowardly rogue in all Bohemia: if you had,"There’s no more cowardly rogue in all of Bohemia. If you had looked large and had spit at him, he would have run."
"I must confess to you, sir, I am no fighter: I am false of heart that way; and that he knew, I warrant him.","I have to confess to you, sir, I’m not a fighter. I’m too faint at heart, and I’m sure he knew it."
How do you now?,How are you now?
"walk: I will even take my leave of you, and pace softly towards my kinsman’s.","Kind sir, much better now than before. I can stand on my own and walk. I’ll even say goodbye to you, and make my way carefully to my relative’s home."
Shall I bring thee on the way?,Shall I help you there?
"No, good-faced sir; no, sweet sir.","No, pretty sir. No, kind sir."
sheep-shearing.,Then best of luck to you. I have to go buy spices for our sheep-shearing.
"Prosper you, sweet sir!","May you prosper, sweet sir!"
"Your purse is not hot enough to purchase your spice. I’ll be with you at your sheep-shearing too: if I shearers prove sheep, let me be unrolled and my name put in the book of virtue!","Your purse is not full enough to purchase your spices. I’ll join you at your sheep-shearing, too. If I don’t make this deception lead to another and prove the shearers as stupid as sheep, let me be removed from the list of thieves and my name become known for virtue!"
"Jog on, jog on, the foot-path way, And merrily hent the stile-a: Your sad tires in a mile-a.","Jog on, jog on, along the foot-path, and merrily grasp the gate. A merry heart can go all day, a sad heart tires after just a mile."
"These your unusual weeds to each part of you Do give a life: no shepherdess, but Flora Peering in April’s front. This your sheep-shearing Is as a meeting of the petty gods,","Your festival clothes give you a new look. No longer a shepherdess, but the goddess of flowers appearing at the beginning of April. Your sheep-shearing is like a meeting of minor gods, and you are the queen of them."
"Sir, my gracious lord, To chide at your extremes it not becomes me: O, pardon, that I name them! Your high self, The gracious mark o’ the land, you have obscured Most goddess-like prank’d up: but that our feasts In every mess have folly and the feeders Digest it with a custom, I should blush To see you so attired, swoon, I think,","My gracious lord, it doesn’t suit me to rebuke you for exaggerations. Oh, pardon me for naming them! You, the one whose charms make him admired by the public, have hidden yourself in rustic clothing, while I, just a poor lowly girl, am made up like a goddess. If there weren’t foolishness at every table during our feasts, and if people weren’t accustomed to such foolishness by now, I’d feel embarrassed to see you dressed like that and would faint to see myself in the mirror."
I bless the time When my good falcon made her flight across Thy father’s ground.,I bless the day when my hunting bird flew across your father’s land.
"Now Jove afford you cause! Hath not been used to fear. Even now I tremble To think your father, by some accident, Should pass this way as you did: O, the Fates! How would he look, to see his work so noble Should I, in these my borrow’d flaunts, behold The sternness of his presence?","Now may Jove give you reason to be glad! For me the difference in rank between us fills me with dread, though you in your greatness aren’t used to fear. Even now I tremble to think that your father might by some accident pass this way, like you did. Oh, the Fates! How would he look when he discovered that his noble son was so humbly dressed! What would he say? How should I, in this borrowed finery, look upon his stern presence?"
"Apprehend Nothing but jollity. The gods themselves, The shapes of beasts upon them: Jupiter Became a bull, and bellow’d; the green Neptune A ram, and bleated; and the fire-robed god, Golden Apollo, a poor humble swain, Were never for a piece of beauty rarer, Nor in a way so chaste, since my desires Run not before mine honour, nor my lusts Burn hotter than my faith.","Imagine only happiness. The gods themselves have taken on the form of beasts when they’re in love. Jupiter became a bull and bellowed; Neptune became a ram and bleated. And the god of the sun, golden Apollo, became a humble shepherd just as I appear today. But their transformations were never for someone so beautiful, and neither were their loves as chaste as mine, because my desires are secondary to my honor, and my faith burns hotter than my lusts."
"Your resolution cannot hold, when ’tis Opposed, as it must be, by the power of the king: One of these two must be necessities, Which then will speak, that you must Or I my life.","But sir, your feelings toward me might falter when they are opposed, as they must be, by the power of the king. Then one of the two must happen: either you will change your feelings or I will lose my life."
"Thou dearest Perdita, With these forced thoughts, I prithee, darken not The mirth o’ the feast. Or I’ll be thine, my fair, Mine own, nor any thing to any, if I be not thine. To this I am most constant, Though destiny say no. Be merry, gentle; Strangle such thoughts as these with any thing Lift up your countenance, as it were the day Of celebration of that nuptial which We two have sworn shall come.","Dearest Perdita, don’t let these farfetched thoughts dampen the high-spirits of the feast. I’ll be yours, my fair love, and not my father’s. I can’t be myself, or anything to anyone, if I’m not yours. My feelings won’t change, even if destiny says we are not to be together. Be happy, dearest. Get rid of these thoughts by busying yourself with something else. Your guests are coming. Look happy, as if it were the day we’re getting married, as we’ve sworn we will."
"O lady Fortune,","Oh, Fortune, remain favorable!"
"See, your guests approach: Address yourself to entertain them sprightly, And let’s be red with mirth.","See, your guests are approaching. Prepare yourself to entertain them in a lively manner, and let’s be red-faced from all our laughter."
"Fie, daughter! when my old wife lived, upon Both dame and servant; welcomed all, served all; Would sing her song and dance her turn; now here, At upper end o’ the table, now i’ the middle; On his shoulder, and his; her face o’ fire She would to each one sip. You are retired, As if you were a feasted one and not The hostess of the meeting: pray you, bid These unknown friends to’s welcome; for it is Come, quench your blushes and present yourself That which you are, mistress o’ the feast: come on, And bid us welcome to your sheep-shearing, As your good flock shall prosper.","Oh, daughter, when my old wife was still alive, on this day she was a pantry maid, butler, cook, mistress of the house, and servant. She welcomed all, served all, would sing her song and dance her share. She would sit first at the head of the table, then in the middle. She’d be on this man’s shoulder, and then on that one’s. Her face would be red from work and what she drank to quench her thirst, and she would drink a toast to each person. You are withdrawn, as if you were a guest and not the hostess of this party. Please, welcome these strangers so that we can become better acquainted. Come, stop blushing and present yourself as that which you are: the mistress of the feast. Come on and welcome us to your sheep-shearing, so that your flock will prosper."
It is my father’s will I should take on me The hostess-ship o’ the day.,"(to Polixenes) Sir, welcome. My father wishes me to be the hostess here today."
"You’re welcome, sir. Give me those flowers there, Dorcas. Reverend sirs, Seeming and savour all the winter long: Grace and remembrance be to you both, And welcome to our shearing!","You are welcome here, sir. Give me those flowers there, Dorcas. Honored sirs, for you there are rosemary and rue Rosemary is an herb that symbolizes remembrance, while rue is an herb that symbolizes repentance and grace. rosemary and rue , which keep their appearance and scent all through the winter. May you both have grace and remembrance, and welcome to our shearing!"
"Shepherdess, With flowers of winter.","Fair shepherdess, since we are old, you do well to pair us with winter flowers Refers to the common metaphor comparing the stages of life to the seasons, with winter being old age. winter flowers ."
"Sir, the year growing ancient, Not yet on summer’s death, nor on the birth Of trembling winter, the fairest Are our carnations and streak’d gillyvors, Which some call nature’s bastards: of that kind Our rustic garden’s barren; and I care not To get slips of them.","Sir, the year is growing old, with the summer not yet over and the winter not yet starting. The fairest flowers of this season are carnations and two-toned gillyflowers, which some call nature’s bastards. But we don’t have any of those flowers in our garden, and I don’t care to get any cuttings of them."
Do you neglect them?,"Kind maiden, why do you reject them?"
For I have heard it said There is an art which in their piedness shares With great creating nature.,Because I’ve heard that their many colors are due as much to cross-breeding as to nature.
"Yet nature is made better by no mean But nature makes that mean: so, over that art Which you say adds to nature, is an art That nature makes. You see, sweet maid, we marry And make conceive a bark of baser kind By bud of nobler race: this is an art Which does mend nature, change it rather, but The art itself is nature.","Perhaps that’s true. But any technique used to improve nature is itself made by nature, so any form of artifice that adds to nature is really a natural artifice. You see, sweet maid, we marry a more noble stem to a wild stem, so that a lesser plant produces one that is superior. This is an art that improves nature, or rather changes it, but the art itself is natural."
So it is.,So it is.
"Then make your garden rich in gillyvors, And do not call them bastards.","Then fill your garden with gillyflowers, and don’t call them bastards."
"I’ll not put The dibble in earth to set one slip of them; This youth should say ’twere well and only therefore Desire to breed by me. Here’s flowers for you; Hot lavender, mints, savoury, marjoram; The marigold, that goes to bed wi’ the sun Of middle summer, and I think they are given To men of middle age. You’re very welcome.","I won’t put a shovel in the dirt to plant a single one of them, just as I wouldn’t want this youth here to think I’m attractive and want to sleep with me only because I’m wearing makeup. Here are flowers for you: lavender, mint, savory, marjoram, and the marigold, which sets with the sun and rises with it filled with dew. These are flowers that bloom in the middle of summer, and I think they should be given to men of middle age. You’re very welcome here. (She gives them flowers.)"
"I should leave grazing, were I of your flock, And only live by gazing.","If I were part of your flock, I would stop grazing and instead gaze on you as my only nourishment."
"You’d be so lean, that blasts of January Would blow you through and through. Now, my fair’st friend, I would I had some flowers o’ the spring that might That wear upon your virgin branches yet Your maidenheads growing: O Proserpina, For the flowers now, that frighted thou let’st fall From Dis’s waggon! daffodils, The winds of March with beauty; violets dim, But sweeter than the lids of Juno’s eyes Or Cytherea’s breath; pale primroses That die unmarried, ere they can behold Most incident to maids; bold oxlips and The crown imperial; lilies of all kinds, The flower-de-luce being one! O, these I lack, To make you garlands of, and my sweet friend,","Oh, not at all! You’d be so skinny that the icy winds of January would blow right through you. (to Florizel) Now, my fairest friend, I wish I had flowers of the spring that would match your age, (to Mopsa and Dorcas) and yours, and yours, who are still in your adolescence. Oh, Proserpina, if only we had the flowers that you, frightened, let fall from Dis’s chariot In Greek myth, Proserpina was abducted by Dis, also known as Pluto, while she was collecting flowers. Proserpina, if only we had the flowers that you, frightened, let fall from Dis’s chariot ! Daffodils that bloom before the swallows dare return from the south, and that charm the winds of March with their beauty. Modest violets that are sweeter than Juno’s eyes Juno was the Roman name for Hera, Zeus’s wife and queen of the gods. Juno’s eyes or Cytherea’s breath Roman name for Venus, goddess of love. Cytherea’s breath . Pale primroses that die unmarried, before they can see the bright sun at full strength—a sickness that often affects young women. Bold oxlips and the crown imperial lily, lilies of all kinds, the flower-de-luce Or fleur-de-lis. flower-de-luce being one! Oh, if only I had these flowers to make garlands and to throw over my sweet friend!"
"What, like a corse?","What, like a corpse?"
"No, like a bank for love to lie and play on; Not like a corse; or if, not to be buried, But quick and in mine arms. Come, take your flowers: In Whitsun pastorals: sure this robe of mine Does change my disposition.","No, like a riverbank for love to lie and play on. Not like a corpse—or, if so, not one to be buried, but one alive and in my arms. Come, take your flowers. I think I am playing as I’ve seen them do during Whitsun A religious feast celebrated seven Sundays after Easter. Whitsun festivities. This outfit I’m wearing certainly changes my attitude."
"What you do Still betters what is done. When you speak, sweet. I’ld have you buy and sell so, so give alms, Pray so; and, for the ordering your affairs, To sing them too: when you do dance, I wish you A wave o’ the sea, that you might ever do And own no other function: each your doing, So singular in each particular, Crowns what you are doing in the present deed, That all your acts are queens.","What you do is always better than what is normally done. When you speak, sweet, I’d have you do it forever. When you sing, I’d have you buy and sell with songs, and give alms, pray, and arrange your affairs with singing. When you dance, I wish you were a wave in the sea, so that you would only ever do that and have no other purpose in life. Everything you do is so perfect that whatever you do is the best."
"Your praises are too large: but that your youth, And the true blood which peepeth fairly through’t, Do plainly give you out an unstain’d shepherd, With wisdom I might fear, my Doricles,","Oh, Doricles The fake name Florizel is using. Doricles , you praise me too much. If your youth and your noble character didn’t shine through your disguise and reveal your purity, I might worry that you were trying to lead me astray."
"I think you have As little skill to fear as I have purpose To put you to’t. But come; our dance, I pray: Your hand, my Perdita: so turtles pair,","I think you have as little cause to fear as I have intention to make you feel afraid. But come, dance with me please. Give me your hand, my Perdita, just as turtledoves pair for life and never part from one another."
I’ll swear for ’em.,I’ll swear to their philosophy.
"This is the prettiest low-born lass that ever Ran on the green-sward: nothing she does or seems But smacks of something greater than herself,","She is the prettiest common girl that’s ever run across the lawn. Everything she does has an air of something greater than herself, something too noble for this place."
"He tells her something That makes her blood look out: good sooth, she is The queen of curds and cream.","He’s saying something that makes her blush. Goodness, her complexion is as creamy as milk."
"Come on, strike up!","Come on, play the music!"
To mend her kissing with!,Mopsa will be your dance partner. Give her garlic to make her breath better!
"Now, in good time!","Now, that’s enough!"
"Not a word, a word; we stand upon our manners. Come, strike up!","Don’t say a word. We’ll act with manners. Come, play the music!"
Which dances with your daughter?,"Good shepherd, can you tell me who is the handsome young man dancing with your daughter?"
"They call him Doricles; and boasts himself To have a worthy feeding: but I have it Upon his own report and I believe it; I think so too; for never gazed the moon Upon the water as he’ll stand and read As ’twere my daughter’s eyes: and, to be plain, I think there is not half a kiss to choose","They call him Doricles and say he has a valuable pasture. He’s told me so himself, and I believe him. He looks honest. He says he loves my daughter, and I think he does. He gazes into my daughter’s eyes as intently as the moon shines onto water. And, to be blunt, I don’t think there’s a way to tell from their kiss who loves the other more."
She dances featly.,She dances well.
"So she does any thing; though I report it, That should be silent: if young Doricles Do light upon her, she shall bring him that","She does everything well. I’ll tell you something I shouldn’t: if young Doricles does marry her, she’ll bring him greater fortune than he guesses."
"O master, if you did but hear the pedlar at the door, you would never dance again after a tabour and pipe; no, the bagpipe could not move you: he sings several tunes faster than you’ll tell money; he ears grew to his tunes.","Oh, master, if you had heard the peddler at the door, you’d never again dance to a tambourine and a pipe, and a bagpipe wouldn’t tempt you. He sings several songs faster than you can count money. He sings them as readily as if he had digested them completely, and all men can’t help but listen."
"He could never come better; he shall come in. I love a ballad but even too well, if it be doleful matter merrily set down, or a very pleasant thing","He couldn’t have come at a better time. Let him in. I love a ballad almost too much, especially a sad subject set to a happy tune, or a pleasant subject sung mournfully."
"He hath songs for man or woman, of all sizes; no milliner can so fit his customers with gloves: he has the prettiest love-songs for maids; so without bawdry, which is strange; with such delicate her;’ and where some stretch-mouthed rascal would, as it were, mean mischief and break a foul gap into the matter, he makes the maid to answer ‘Whoop, do me no harm, good man;’ puts him off, slights him, with","He has songs for all men and women. He fits them to his customers closer than gloves. He has pretty love songs for the maid, without any lewdness, which is unusual, and with delicate refrains full of dildos and orgasms The servant apparently doesn’t understand that the songs are, in fact, full of sexual puns. delicate refrains full of dildos and orgasms , like “jump her and thump her.” And if an obscene rascal would try to make mischief and interrupt the song, the peddler makes the maid answer, “Hey, do me no harm, good man,” and puts him off that way."
This is a brave fellow.,This is an excellent fellow.
"Believe me, thou talkest of an admirable conceited fellow. Has he any unbraided wares?","Believe me, you are talking about a very witty fellow. Does he have any new items to sell?"
"He hath ribbons of an the colours i’ the rainbow; learnedly handle, though they come to him by the gro inkles, caddisses, cambrics, lawns: why, he sings ’em over as they were gods or goddesses; you would think a smock were a she-angel, he so chants","He has ribbons in all the colors of the rainbow, and countless laces that he gets wholesale. He has linen tape and yarn tape, fine linens, too. Why, he sings about them as if they were gods and goddesses. You would think a ladies’ undergarment were an angel, the way he sings to the cuff and embroidery about the bodice."
Prithee bring him in; and let him approach singing.,"Please, let him in, and have him sing while he’s approaching us."
Forewarn him that he use no scurrilous words in ’s tunes.,Warn him that he musn’t use bad words in his songs.
"You have of these pedlars, that have more in them than you’ld think, sister.",There are some peddlers who have more bad words in them than you would think.
"Ay, good brother, or go about to think.","Ay, good brother, or wish to think."
"Lawn as white as driven snow; Cyprus black as e’er was crow; Gloves as sweet as damask roses; Masks for faces and for noses; Perfume for a lady’s chamber; Golden quoifs and stomachers, For my lads to give their dears: Pins and poking-sticks of steel, Come buy of me, come; come buy, come buy; Buy lads, or else your lasses cry: Come buy.","Linen as white as wind-whipped snow; Crepe A material used for mourning clothes. Crepe as black as a crow; Gloves as sweet-smelling as damask roses; Masks to cover faces and noses; A glittering bracelet, a necklace made of amber; Perfume made for a ladies room; Golden caps and dress fronts For my young men to give to their sweethearts; Pins and rods of steel; Whatever young woman need from head to toe; Come buy them from me, or your ladies will cry. Come buy."
"If I were not in love with Mopsa, thou shouldst take no money of me; but being enthralled as I am, it","If I weren’t in love with Mopsa, I wouldn’t give you a dime. But being infatuated as I am, I’ll have to get a few ribbons and gloves."
I was promised them against the feast; but they come not too late now.,"You promised them to me in time for the feast, but I guess it’s not too late."
"He hath promised you more than that, or there be liars.","He’s promised more than that, or he is a liar."
"He hath paid you all he promised you; may be, he has","He has given you all he promised, and maybe a baby on top of it. It will shame you to pay him back with that baby in nine months."
"Is there no manners left among maids? will they wear their plackets where they should bear their faces? Is there not milking-time, when you are going to bed, or kiln-hole, to whistle off these our guests? ’tis well they are whispering: clamour your tongues, and not a word more.","Don’t you maids have any manners? Will you reveal your most intimate affairs in public? Isn’t there a time to tell these secrets while you are milking, or going to bed, or at the fireplace, rather than tattling in front of our guests? Good thing they are whispering among themselves. Bite your tongues, and don’t say another word."
"I have done. Come, you promised me a tawdry-lace and a pair of sweet gloves.","I won’t. Come on, you promised me a cheap neckerchief and a pair of gloves."
and lost all my money?,Didn’t I tell you I was tricked along my way and lost all my money?
"And indeed, sir, there are cozeners abroad; therefore it behoves men to be wary.","It’s true, sir. There are tricksters out there, so it’s in a man’s best interest to watch out."
"Fear not thou, man, thou shalt lose nothing here.","Don’t fear, man, you won’t lose anything here."
"I hope so, sir; for I have about me many parcels of charge.","I hope not, sir, since I have so many parcels of value."
What hast here? ballads?,What do you have here? Ballads?
"Pray now, buy some: I love a ballad in print o’ life, for then we are sure they are true.","Please, buy some. I love having a ballad written out, because then we are sure it’s true."
"Here’s one to a very doleful tune, how a usurer’s burthen and how she longed to eat adders’ heads and toads carbonadoed.","Here’s one that’s sung to a very mournful tune: how a money lender’s wife delivered twenty bags of money in one birth, and she wanted to eat snakes’ heads and toads grilled."
"Is it true, think you?",Do you think it’s true?
"Very true, and but a month old.","Very true, and only a month old."
Bless me from marrying a usurer!,May I never marry a loan shark!
"Here’s the midwife’s name to’t, one Mistress Tale-porter, and five or six honest wives that were present. Why should I carry lies abroad?","Here’s the name of the midwife who helped at the birth, one Mistress Taleporter, and the five or six who witnessed it. Why should I spread lies around?"
"Pray you now, buy it.","Please, buy it."
ballads; we’ll buy the other things anon.,"Come on, put it aside, and let’s see more ballads before we buy anything."
"Here’s another ballad of a fish, that appeared upon the coast on Wednesday the four-score of April, forty thousand fathom above water, and sung this thought she was a woman and was turned into a cold fish for she would not exchange flesh with one that loved her: the ballad is very pitiful and as true.","Here’s another ballad about a fish that appeared on the shore on Wednesday, the eightieth of April, two hundred and forty thousand feet above sea level, and sang this song to soften the hearts of young women. Some thought it was a woman who had been changed into a cold fish because she wouldn’t sleep with the man who loved her. The ballad is as sad as it is true."
"Is it true too, think you?","You think it’s true, too?"
my pack will hold.,"Five judges would swear to it, and there are more witnesses’ statements than I could pack along with me."
Lay it by too: another.,"Put that one aside, too, and let’s see another."
"This is a merry ballad, but a very pretty one.","This is a happy ballad, and very pretty."
Let’s have some merry ones.,Let’s have some happy ones.
"the tune of ‘Two maids wooing a man:’ there’s scarce a maid westward but she sings it; ’tis in request, I can tell you.","Here’s a very merry one, which goes to the tune of “Two Maids Courting a Man.” There’s hardly a woman west of here that doesn’t sing it. It’s in great demand, I can tell you."
"We can both sing it: if thou’lt bear a part, thou","We can both sing it. If you will sing one part, we can do it, since there are three parts and three of us."
We had the tune on’t a month ago.,We learned the tune for it a month ago.
I can bear my part; you must know ’tis my occupation; have at it with you.,"I can sing my part. As you know, I’m a singer by trade. Go ahead."
"Get you hence, for I must go","Go away, because I must go to a place that you don’t know."
Whither?,Where?
"O, whither?","Oh, where?"
Whither?,Where?
"It becomes thy oath full well,",It wouldn’t be breaking your promise to tell me your secrets.
"Me too, let me go thither.","Me, too, let me go with you."
Or thou goest to the orange or mill.,Or perhaps you are going to the farmhouse or the mill.
"If to either, thou dost ill.","If you are going either place, you are doing wrong."
Neither.,I’m not going to either one.
"What, neither?","What, neither one?"
Neither.,Neither one.
Thou hast sworn my love to be.,You’ve sworn to be my love.
"Thou hast sworn it more to me: Then whither goest? say, whither?","You’ve sworn it more to me. Then where are you going? Tell me, where?"
"father and the gentlemen are in sad talk, and we’ll not trouble them. Come, bring away thy pack after me. Wenches, I’ll buy for you both. Pedlar, let’s have the first choice. Follow me, girls.","We’ll finish this song soon by ourselves. My father and the gentlemen are having a serious talk, and we should leave them alone. Come, bring your pack and follow me. Girls, I’ll buy things for you both. Peddler, give me first choice. Follow me, girls."
And you shall pay well for ’em.,And you will pay a great deal for them!
"Will you buy any tape, Or lace for your cape, My dainty duck, my dear-a? Any silk, any thread, Of the new’st and finest, finest wear-a? Come to the pedlar; Money’s a medler. That doth utter all men’s ware-a.","Will you buy any ribbon, Or lace for your cape, My dainty little dear, Any silk, any thread Any ornaments for your head, The newest and finest to wear? Come to the peddler Money is a meddler When it offers all a man’s items for sale."
"three neat-herds, three swine-herds, that have made themselves all men of hair, they call themselves saltiers, and they have a dance which the wenches say is a gallimaufry of gambols, because they are be not too rough for some that know little but bowling, it will please plentifully.","Master, three cart drivers, three shepherds, three cowherds, and three swineherds have arrived, dressed up in animal skins. They call themselves jumpers, and they have a dance that the wenches say is filled with many leaps and hops. If it isn’t too energetic for those more used to sedate sports like bowling, it will be greatly pleasing."
"Away! we’ll none on ’t: here has been too much homely foolery already. I know, sir, we weary you.","Send them away! We’ll have none of it. There has been too much vulgar foolishness already. I know, sir, that we are tiring you."
these four threes of herdsmen.,"You’ll tire those that entertain us. Please, let’s see these four trios of herdsmen."
"One three of them, by their own report, sir, hath danced before the king; and not the worst of the three but jumps twelve foot and a half by the squier.",One trio tells me that they have danced before the king. And even the worst of the three jumps twelve and half feet exactly.
"pleased, let them come in; but quickly now.","Stop your chattering. Since these good men would be pleased to see them, let them in, and quickly."
"Why, they stay at door, sir.","Why, they’re right at the door, sir."
"O, father, you’ll know more of that hereafter.","Oh, father, you’ll know more about that soon."
Is it not too far gone? ’Tis time to part them.,Hasn’t it gone too far? It’s time to separate them. He’s naïve and tells them too much.
"How now, fair shepherd! Your heart is full of something that does take Your mind from feasting. Sooth, when I was young And handed love as you do, I was wont The pedlar’s silken treasury and have pour’d it To her acceptance; you have let him go And nothing marted with him. If your lass Interpretation should abuse and call this For a reply, at least if you make a care Of happy holding her.","Come now, handsome shepherd! There is something in your heart that is keeping your mind from enjoying the feast. When I was young and enjoyed love the way you do, I tended to give my girl lots of gifts. I would have ransacked the peddler’s silks and treasures and given her them for her approval. You’ve let him go without buying a thing. If your lass interprets this as a lack of love or a lack of money, you’ll have a hard time explaining it, at least if you want her to stay with you."
"Old sir, I know She prizes not such trifles as these are: Up in my heart; which I have given already, But not deliver’d. O, hear me breathe my life Before this ancient sir, who, it should seem, Hath sometime loved! I take thy hand, this hand, Or Ethiopian’s tooth, or the fann’d snow that’s bolted By the northern blasts twice o’er.","Old sir, I know she doesn’t care for such trifles as these. The gifts she wants from me are from my heart, and they are hers already, though I haven’t delivered them yet. (to Perdita) Oh, listen to me telling my private thoughts to this old man, who it seems has been in love on occasion! I take your hand, as soft and as white as a dove’s downy feather, or the snow that is blown about by the wind."
What follows this? The hand was fair before! I have put you out: But to your protestation; let me hear What you profess.,What does this mean? How delicately the young man seems to wash the hand that was already beautiful. I’ve interrupted. But back to your declaration. Let me hear more about your love.
"Do, and be witness to ’t.","Do, and witness how I feel."
And this my neighbour too?,"And my companion, too?"
"And he, and more Than he, and men, the earth, the heavens, and all: That, were I crown’d the most imperial monarch, Thereof most worthy, were I the fairest youth More than was ever man’s, I would not prize them Without her love; for her employ them all; Commend them and condemn them to her service Or to their own perdition.","Him, and others, and all men, the earth, the heavens and everything. If I were the most powerful and worthy king, or the most handsome youth to ever draw people’s eyes, or if I had greater strength and knowledge than any other man, they would mean nothing to me without her love. I would dedicate them to her service or sentence them to damnation."
Fairly offer’d.,Well said.
This shows a sound affection.,This shows his strong affection for her.
"But, my daughter, Say you the like to him?","But, my daughter, would you say the same to him?"
I cannot speak By the pattern of mine own thoughts I cut out The purity of his.,"I can’t speak as well, not nearly as well. But I couldn’t say anything more. My own thoughts are echoed in his pure words."
"Take hands, a bargain! And, friends unknown, you shall bear witness to ’t: Her portion equal his.","Shake hands. It’s a deal! And, friendly strangers, you’ll be a witness to this. I give my daughter to him in marriage and will make her dowry equal to his fortune."
"O, that must be I’ the virtue of your daughter: one being dead, I shall have more than you can dream of yet; Contract us ’fore these witnesses.","Then her dowry must be her virtue, since once my father is dead I will inherit more than you can dream of. It will be enough for you to wonder at it. But, come, bind us together before these witnesses."
"Come, your hand; And, daughter, yours.","Give me your hand, and daughter, give me yours."
"Soft, swain, awhile, beseech you;","Gentle young shepherd, wait, please. Do you have a father?"
I have: but what of him?,"I do, but what about him?"
Knows he of this?,Does he know about this?
He neither does nor shall.,"He doesn’t, and he won’t."
"Methinks a father That best becomes the table. Pray you once more, Is not your father grown incapable Of reasonable affairs? is he not stupid With age and altering rheums? can he speak? hear? Lies he not bed-rid? and again does nothing But what he did being childish?","I think a father is the best guest at his son’s wedding. Please, once more, has your father become incapable of doing normal tasks? Is he senile from age and illness? Can he speak and hear? Does he know one man from another? Can he handle his own estate? Is he confined to his bed and unable to do the things he did when he was younger?"
"No, good sir; He has his health and ampler strength indeed","No, good sir, he is healthy, and indeed he is even stronger than most people of his age."
"By my white beard, You offer him, if this be so, a wrong Something unfilial: reason my son Should choose himself a wife, but as good reason But fair posterity, should hold some counsel In such a business.","By my white beard, if this is so then you are wronging him in a way unsuitable for a son. It’s reasonable that a son should choose a wife, but it’s just as reasonable that his father should be able to have some say in the matter, since all his joy is in his family."
"I yield all this; But for some other reasons, my grave sir, My father of this business.","I agree with all you’re saying. But there are other reasons, my serious sir, which it’s best you don’t know regarding why I don’t tell my father of this."
Let him know’t.,Let him know about it.
He shall not.,He won’t know about it.
"Prithee, let him.","Please, let him."
"No, he must not.","No, he must not."
"Let him, my son: he shall not need to grieve At knowing of thy choice.","Let him know, my son. He won’t grieve when he hears your choice."
"Come, come, he must not. Mark our contract.","Come, come, he must not know. Sign our contract."
"Mark your divorce, young sir,","Sign your divorce, young sir!"
"Whom son I dare not call; thou art too base To be acknowledged: thou a sceptre’s heir, That thus affect’st a sheep-hook! [To the Shepherd] Thou old traitor, I am sorry that by hanging thee I can Of excellent witchcraft, who of force must know The royal fool thou copest with,—","I don’t dare call you son. You are too lowly for me to acknowledge. You are the heir of a king, and you want to be a shepherd! (to the Shepherd) You old traitor, I’m sorry that hanging you will only shorten your life by a week! (to Perdita) And you, you skilled little witch, you must know you are dealing with a royal fool—"
"O, my heart!","Oh, my heart!"
"I’ll have thy beauty scratch’d with briers, and made If I may ever know thou dost but sigh That thou no more shalt see this knack, as never I mean thou shalt, we’ll bar thee from succession; Not hold thee of our blood, no, not our kin, Follow us to the court. Thou churl, for this time, Though full of our displeasure, yet we free thee From the dead blow of it. And you, enchantment.— Worthy enough a herdsman: yea, him too, Unworthy thee,—if ever henceforth thou These rural latches to his entrance open, Or hoop his body more with thy embraces, I will devise a death as cruel for thee","I’ll have your beautiful face scratched with thorns and made worse than your social rank. (to Florizel) As for you, foolish boy, if I ever find out that you’ve so much as sighed about not seeing this whore again—as I mean you won’t—I’ll bar you from inheriting the throne. I won’t consider you related to me at all. Listen to me: follow me to the court, you delinquent, because this time I’ll let you off easy, even though I am full of rage. (to Perdita) And you, witch, you’re only good enough for a herdsman, and would be for Florizel, too, who lowers himself to the position of shepherd, if not for the royal blood in his veins. If you ever come near him or put your arms around him again, I’ll devise a death for you that is as cruel as you are vulnerable to it."
"Even here undone! I was not much afeard; for once or twice I was about to speak and tell him plainly, The selfsame sun that shines upon his court Looks on alike. Will’t please you, sir, be gone? I told you what would come of this: beseech you, Of your own state take care: this dream of mine,— Being now awake, I’ll queen it no inch farther,","We’re ruined even here! I was not very afraid. Once or twice I was about to speak and tell him bluntly that the same sun that illuminates his court doesn’t hide its face from our cottage but looks down here all the same. Will you please leave, sir? I told you what would come of this. Please, take care of yourself. Now that I’m awake, I won’t act the queen anymore but will milk my ewes and weep."
"Why, how now, father! Speak ere thou diest.","Why, what about you, father? Speak before you die."
"I cannot speak, nor think Nor dare to know that which I know. O sir! That thought to fill his grave in quiet, yea, To die upon the bed my father died, To lie close by his honest bones: but now Some hangman must put on my shroud and lay me That knew’st this was the prince, and wouldst adventure To mingle faith with him! Undone! undone! If I might die within this hour, I have lived","I can’t speak, or think, or dare to know what I know. Oh. sir! You have ruined a man of sixty-three. I thought I would go to my grave in peace, to die in the bed my father died in, and be buried close to his honest bones. But now a hangman will put a burial shroud on me and put me in an unconsecrated grave. (to Perdita) Oh, cursed girl, you knew this was the prince and dared to exchange vows with him! Undone! If I can die within the hour, I will have died when I wish."
"Why look you so upon me? I am but sorry, not afeard; delay’d, But nothing alter’d: what I was, I am; More straining on for plucking back, not following","(to Perdita) Why do you look at me like that? I am only sorry, not afraid. Our plans are delayed, but not altered. I was in love, and I still am. Now I’m all the more determined to move forward for having been held back. I won’t be pulled against my will."
"Gracious my lord, You know your father’s temper: at this time He will allow no speech, which I do guess You do not purpose to him; and as hardly Then, till the fury of his highness settle, Come not before him.","My gracious lord, you know your father’s temper. Just now he won’t let you speak, which I guess you don’t plan to do anyway, and I fear he can hardly stand to look at you yet. So, until his anger settles, don’t approach him."
"I not purpose it. I think, Camillo?","I won’t try it. Is it you, Camillo?"
"Even he, my lord.","It is I, my lord."
"How often have I told you ’twould be thus! How often said, my dignity would last But till ’twere known!",How often have I told you it would be this way! How often have I said that my dignity would only last as long we weren’t discovered!
"It cannot fail but by Let nature crush the sides o’ the earth together And mar the seeds within! Lift up thy looks: From my succession wipe me, father; I Am heir to my affection.","Your dignity will only be hurt if I break my promise to you, and if I do, may nature crush the Earth and any sources of life within it! Lift up your eyes. Let my father disown me as his heir. I am heir to my love."
Be advised.,Be careful.
"I am, and by my fancy: if my reason Will thereto be obedient, I have reason; If not, my senses, better pleased with madness, Do bid it welcome.","I am, by my heart. If my reason will obey love, I’ll welcome reason. If not, I will be happier with madness and will welcome it gladly."
"This is desperate, sir.","This is a desperate act, sir."
"So call it: but it does fulfil my vow; I needs must think it honesty. Camillo, Not for Bohemia, nor the pomp that may Be thereat glean’d, for all the sun sees or In unknown fathoms, will I break my oath To this my fair beloved: therefore, I pray you, As you have ever been my father’s honour’d friend, When he shall miss me,—as, in faith, I mean not Upon his passion; let myself and fortune Tug for the time to come. This you may know And so deliver, I am put to sea With her whom here I cannot hold on shore; A vessel rides fast by, but not prepared For this design. What course I mean to hold Shall nothing benefit your knowledge, nor Concern me the reporting.","You may call it that, but it does make good on what I just said, so I think it is an honest act. Camillo, I won’t break my promise to Perdita for Bohemia, or all the glamour of being its king, or even for all the world the sun shines on, or the caves under the earth, or the depths hidden by the sea. I don’t mean to see my father again. So, please, as you have been his closest friend, speak wise words to him and soothe his anger when he realizes I’m gone. Let me wrestle with fortune for some time. You can tell my father that I’ve gone to sea with the woman I’m not allowed to hold on shore. Luckily for us, a vessel is close by, though it was not there for this purpose. It won’t help either of us for me to tell you where we’re going."
"I would your spirit were easier for advice, Or stronger for your need.","Oh, my lord! I wish you had a greater inclination to take advice, or that you were stronger."
"Hark, Perdita.","Listen, Perdita."
I’ll hear you by and by.,"(to Camillo) Camillo, I’ll listen to you in a moment."
"Resolved for flight. Now were I happy, if His going I could frame to serve my turn, Save him from danger, do him love and honour, Purchase the sight again of dear Sicilia I so much thirst to see.","He’s made his mind up to flee. I would be happy if I could make this departure serve my own purposes. I can save him from danger and treat him with love and honor, and I can also gain sight of dear Sicilia and that unhappy king who is my master, and whom I long to see again."
"Now, good Camillo; I am so fraught with curious business that I leave out ceremony.","Now, good Camillo, I’m so overwhelmed with this strange undertaking that I’ve forgotten my manners."
"You have heard of my poor services, i’ the love That I have borne your father?","Sir, I think you have heard of the modest services and the love I have given your father?"
Very nobly Have you deserved: it is my father’s music To have them recompensed as thought on.,"The praise is well-deserved. My father delights to speak of your actions, and he hopes that he repays them as much as he praises them."
"Well, my lord, If you may please to think I love the king And through him what is nearest to him, which is If your more ponderous and settled project May suffer alteration, on mine honour, I’ll point you where you shall have such receiving As shall become your highness; where you may There’s no disjunction to be made, but by— As heavens forefend!—your ruin; marry her, And, with my best endeavours in your absence, Your discontenting father strive to qualify","Well, my lord, if you do believe that I love the king and what he holds most dear, which is you, take my advice: if your determined course might be altered a bit, I swear I’ll show you a place where you’ll be received in a manner fit for your highness. There you’ll be able to enjoy life with your sweetheart, from whom I can see there is no chance of separating you except—heaven forbid!—through your ruin. Marry her, and I’ll strive in your absence to talk down your unhappy father and turn him to approval."
"How, Camillo, May this, almost a miracle, be done? That I may call thee something more than man And after that trust to thee.","How might this near miracle be accomplished, Camillo? If you can do it, I would say you’re something more than a man and would always trust you."
A place whereto you’ll go?,Have you thought about where you’ll go?
"Not any yet: But as the unthought-on accident is guilty To what we wildly do, so we profess Of every wind that blows.","Not any place yet. But since an unforeseen accident caused us to take this course of action, we’ll pledge ourselves to fate and go where the wind blows us."
"Then list to me: This follows, if you will not change your purpose But undergo this flight, make for Sicilia, For so I see she must be, ‘fore Leontes: She shall be habited as it becomes The partner of your bed. Methinks I see Leontes opening his free arms and weeping As ‘twere i’ the father’s person; kisses the hands Of your fresh princess; o’er and o’er divides him ‘Twixt his unkindness and his kindness; the one He chides to hell and bids the other grow","Then listen to me. If you won’t change your mind and are determined to flee, head to Sicilia, and present yourself and your fair princess before Leontes. She should be dressed in a way suitable for the wife of a prince. I think Leontes will open his arms and will weep as he bids you welcome. He’ll ask your forgiveness as though he were your father, and he’ll kiss your princess’s hands. He’s caught between berating himself for his past unkindness to your father and trying to be more kind now."
"Worthy Camillo, What colour for my visitation shall I Hold up before him?","Worthy Camillo, what reason should I give him for my visit?"
"Sent by the king your father The manner of your bearing towards him, with What you as from your father shall deliver, Things known betwixt us three, I’ll write you down: The which shall point you forth at every sitting But that you have your father’s bosom there And speak his very heart.",Tell him you are sent by your father to greet him and comfort him. I’ll write you a note containing things known by the three of us telling you what to say. That and the manner with which you greet him will make him believe that you represent your father’s feelings.
I am bound to you: There is some sap in this.,I owe you for this. There’s life in this plan.
"Than a wild dedication of yourselves To unpath’d waters, undream’d shores, most certain To miseries enough; no hope to help you, But as you shake off one to take another; Do their best office, if they can but stay you Where you’ll be loath to be: besides you know Prosperity’s the very bond of love, Whose fresh complexion and whose heart together","It’s a much more promising way of doing things than simply throwing yourself on unmarked waters and strange shores, which will certainly lead you to plenty of misery. There would be no hope to help you aside from casting off one shore to find another. Your anchors would be your only certainty, and the best they can do is hold you in a place you’ll be loath to remain. Besides, you know that good fortune keeps love strong, and that affliction will change the freshness of your affection and the feelings of your heart."
"One of these is true: I think affliction may subdue the cheek, But not take in the mind.","One of those is true. Affliction may make us less fresh, but it won’t alter our feelings."
"Yea, say you so? seven years Be born another such.",Do you say so? There won’t be anyone like you born at your father’s house for many years.
"My good Camillo, She is as forward of her breeding as","My good Camillo, she is as superior to her upbringing as she is inferior to our noble rank."
"I cannot say ’tis pity She lacks instructions, for she seems a mistress To most that teach.","I can’t say it’s a pity she’s uneducated, because she seems more intelligent than those that teach."
"Your pardon, sir; for this","Pardon me, sir, I’ll thank you with my blushing."
"My prettiest Perdita! But O, the thorns we stand upon! Camillo, Preserver of my father, now of me, The medicine of our house, how shall we do? Nor shall appear in Sicilia.","My pretty Perdita! But, oh, the danger we’re in! Camillo, you’ve rescued my father and now me. You heal our family. What will we do? I’m not dressed like the king’s son, and I certainly won’t look like royalty once we reach Sicilia."
"My lord, Fear none of this: I think you know my fortunes Do all lie there: it shall be so my care The scene you play were mine. For instance, sir, That you may know you shall not want, one word.","My lord, don’t worry about it. I think you know that my fortune is still in Sicilia. I’ll make sure you are dressed as royally as if I were dressing you for a play I had written. Let me have a word with you, to reassure you that you won’t be left in need."
"Ha, ha! what a fool Honesty is! and Trust, his sworn brother, a very simple gentleman! I have sold ribbon, glass, pomander, brooch, table-book, ballad, knife, tape, glove, shoe-tie, bracelet, horn-ring, to keep my pack from fasting: they throng who should buy first, as if my trinkets had been by which means I saw whose purse was best in picture; and what I saw, to my good use I remembered. My clown, who wants but something to be a reasonable man, grew so in love with the till he had both tune and words; which so drew the rest of the herd to me that all their other senses stuck in ears: you might have pinched a placket, it was senseless; ’twas nothing to geld a codpiece of a chains: no hearing, no feeling, but my sir’s song, and admiring the nothing of it. So that in this time of lethargy I picked and cut most of their festival purses; and had not the old man come in son and scared my choughs from the chaff, I had not left a purse alive in the whole army.","Ha ha! Honesty is such a fool, and Trust, his brother, is so naïve! I have sold all my goods—not a fake stone, or a ribbon, glass, brooch, book, ballad, knife, tape, glove, shoelace, bracelet, or ring made of horn remains in my pack. They crowded around me to see who could buy first, as if my trinkets were blessed and brought grace to the buyer. It let me know who had the fullest purse, and what I saw I remembered to put to use later. The yokel, who lacks just one quality to be a reasonable man, loved the girls’ song so much that he wouldn’t leave until he had bought both the tune and the words. And all the others were so entranced that it was as though all their other senses were committed to hearing. You could have stolen a skirt because no one could feel anything. It was easy to strip a purse from a codpiece Part of a man’s clothing attached to the front of his hose and covering his genitals. codpiece , and I could have used a file to take keys off a chain. There was no hearing or feeling anything except for that song, and admiration for it. So while they were spellbound I stole most of their purses, which were filled with money for the festival. If the old man hadn’t come in wailing about his daughter and the king’s son and scared my little birds from the feed, I would have taken purses from every one."
"Nay, but my letters, by this means being there So soon as you arrive, shall clear that doubt.","No, but my letters will be there as soon as you arrive, and they’ll clear up that question."
And those that you’ll procure from King Leontes—,And the letter that you’ll get from King Leontes—
Shall satisfy your father.,Will set your father at ease.
Happy be you! All that you speak shows fair.,May you be happy! All your plans are good.
Who have we here?,Who is this?
Nothing may give us aid.,"We’ll use this man, since we should use anything that will help."
"If they have overheard me now, why, hanging.","If they’ve overheard me, I’ll be hanged."
"How now, good fellow! why shakest thou so? Fear not, man; here’s no harm intended to thee.","How are you, good fellow? Why are you shaking? Don’t worry, man, we don’t intend you any harm."
"I am a poor fellow, sir.","I am a poor man, sir."
"Why, be so still; here’s nobody will steal that from thee: yet for the outside of thy poverty we must make an exchange; therefore discase thee instantly, —thou must think there’s a necessity in’t,—and pennyworth on his side be the worst, yet hold thee, there’s some boot.","Why, be still. No one here will steal from you. But we need your poor-looking clothes. Undress right now—it’s urgent—and swap clothes with this gentleman. The bargain is bad for him, but wait, (giving him money) there’s something more in it for you."
"I am a poor fellow, sir. [Aside]","I am a poor man, sir. (aside) I know you well enough."
"Nay, prithee, dispatch: the gentleman is half flayed already.","No, please, hurry. The gentleman is already half undressed."
"Are you in earnest, sir? [Aside]","Are you serious, sir? (aside) I think it’s a trick."
"Dispatch, I prithee.","Hurry, I beg you."
"Indeed, I have had earnest: but I cannot with conscience take it.","Indeed, I think it is sincere, but I can’t believe it."
"Unbuckle, unbuckle.","Unbuckle, unbuckle."
"Come home to ye!—you must retire yourself Into some covert: take your sweetheart’s hat And pluck it o’er your brows, muffle your face, Dismantle you, and, as you can, disliken For I do fear eyes over—to shipboard Get undescried.","(to Perdita) Lucky mistress—may you be lucky yet! You must take a disguise. Put on your sweetheart’s hat and pull it down over your eyes, wrap up your face, take off your outer garments, and, as much as you can, change your appearance as much as possible. That way I hope you’ll get to the ship without being discovered, for I fear that people are watching for you."
I see the play so lies That I must bear a part.,I understand that what we’re doing means I have to play a role.
Have you done there?,There’s no helping it. Are you done there?
"Should I now meet my father, He would not call me son.","If I ran into my father now, he wouldn’t know me as his son."
"Nay, you shall have no hat.","No, you won’t have a hat."
"Come, lady, come. Farewell, my friend.","Come along, lady, come. Farewell, my friend."
"Adieu, sir.","Goodbye, sir."
"O Perdita, what have we twain forgot! Pray you, a word.","Oh, Perdita, we’ve forgotten something now! Please, let’s have a word."
"[Aside] What I do next, shall be to tell the king Wherein my hope is I shall so prevail To force him after: in whose company I shall review Sicilia, for whose sight I have a woman’s longing.","(aside) Next I’ll tell the king that they’ve escaped and where they are going. Then I hope I can persuade him to follow after them, and in his company I’ll then return to Sicilia, which I’ve longed to see again."
"Thus we set on, Camillo, to the sea-side.","May fortune speed us! So we set forth to sea, Camillo."
The swifter speed the better.,The faster the better.
"I understand the business, I hear it: to have an open ear, a quick eye, and a nimble hand, is also, to smell out work for the other senses. I see this is the time that the unjust man doth thrive. What an exchange had this been without boot! What a boot is here with this exchange! Sure the gods do extempore. The prince himself is about a piece of iniquity, stealing away from his father with his clog at his heels: if I thought it were a piece of honesty to acquaint the king withal, I would not and therein am I constant to my profession.","I think I understand this matter and am hearing it right. It’s necessary for a thief to have an open ear, a quick eye, and a nimble hand. A good nose is needed, too, to find work for the other senses. I see that this is a time when the unfair man thrives. What an exchange this would have been even without payment! What a profit I got through this exchange! Surely the gods are indulging us, and we can do whatever we want on a whim. The prince himself is doing wrong, sneaking away from his father with his girlfriend. If I thought it were an honest deed to tell the king, I wouldn’t do it. I think it is more dishonest to conceal it, so I’ll remain true to my profession and say nothing."
"Aside, aside; here is more matter for a hot brain: every lane’s end, every shop, church, session, hanging, yields a careful man work.","Aha, here is more to do for a sharp mind. Every lane, every shop, church, meeting, or hanging gives a careful man an opportunity."
There is no other way but to tell the king she’s a changeling and none of your flesh and blood.,"See, look at the situation you are in now! There’s no way out but to tell the king that she’s a changeling A child believed to have been secretly swapped for the parents’ real child by fairies. changeling and not your flesh and blood."
"Nay, but hear me.","Perhaps, but listen to me."
"Nay, but hear me.","No, listen to me."
"Go to, then.","Go on, then."
"She being none of your flesh and blood, your flesh and blood has not offended the king; and so your flesh and blood is not to be punished by him. Show those things you found about her, those secret done, let the law go whistle: I warrant you.","Since she’s not actually related to you, your family hasn’t offended the king, and so he shouldn’t punish your family. Show him what secret things you’ve found with her, everything but what she has on her. Once that’s done, the law will have nothing on you, I guarantee you."
"I will tell the king all, every word, yea, and his son’s pranks too; who, I may say, is no honest man, neither to his father nor to me, to go about to make","I’ll tell the king everything, yes, every word, and I’ll reveal his son’s pranks, too. I must say, his son isn’t an honest man to either his father or to me, trying to make me the king’s brother-in-law."
"Indeed, brother-in-law was the farthest off you could have been to him and then your blood had been the dearer by I know how much an ounce.","Indeed, brother-in-law is the furthest you could be from him, and your blood would have been not at all more valuable."
"[Aside] Very wisely, puppies!","(aside) Very wise, gullible men!"
fardel will make him scratch his beard.,"Well, let’s go to the king. There is something in this bundle that will make him reconsider things."
[Aside] I know not what impediment this complaint may be to the flight of my master.,"(aside) I don’t know how this complaint might hinder the flight of Florizel, my master."
Pray heartily he be at palace.,Let’s hope that he’s at the palace.
sometimes by chance: let me pocket up my pedlar’s excrement.,"(aside) Even if I’m not naturally honest, sometimes I happen to be. Let me take off my peddler’s beard."
"How now, rustics! whither are you bound?","Hello, countrymen! Where are you going?"
"To the palace, an it like your worship.","To the palace, if it pleases your worship."
"Your affairs there, what, with whom, the condition names, your ages, of what having, breeding, and any thing that is fitting to be known, discover.","Tell me what your business is there, and with whom, what’s in that bundle, where you live, your names, ages, what you own and your parents, or anything else that ought to be known."
"We are but plain fellows, sir.","We’re just ordinary fellows, sir."
"A lie; you are rough and hairy. Let me have no often give us soldiers the lie: but we pay them for it with stamped coin, not stabbing steel; therefore they do not give us the lie.","That’s a lie. You’re ragged-looking and hairy. Don’t lie to me. It only works for tradesmen, and they often call us soldiers liars and cheat us at the same time. But we pay them for it with coins rather than swords, so they’re not really giving us lies since we’re paying."
"Your worship had like to have given us one, if you",You would have given us a lie if you hadn’t stopped yourself in the middle.
"Are you a courtier, an’t like you, sir?","Are you from the court, if you please, sir?"
"Whether it like me or no, I am a courtier. Seest thou not the air of the court in these enfoldings? hath not my gait in it the measure of the court? not on thy baseness court-contempt? Thinkest thou, for that I insinuate, or toaze from thee thy business, I am therefore no courtier? I am courtier cap-a-pe; and one that will either push on or pluck open thy affair.","I am from the court, whether it please me or not. Don’t you see an air of the court in my clothes? Don’t I walk as though I’m from the court? Don’t you smell the odor of the court on me? Don’t I treat your base rank with the contempt of the court? Do you think that because I subtly draw out your business from you, that I’m not from the court? I am a courtier from head to foot. And I’ll either push along or prevent your business there, so I command you to tell me what it’s about."
"My business, sir, is to the king.","My business, sir, is with the king."
What advocate hast thou to him?,Do you have an advocate with him?
"I know not, an’t like you.",I don’t know.
have none.,"An advocate means a pheasant at the court The Yokel thinks advocate means bribe, and game birds like pheasants were supposedly given as bribes at local courts. advocate means a pheasant at the court ; say you don’t have one."
"None, sir; I have no pheasant, cock nor hen.","None, sir. I don’t have a pheasant, either a male or a female one."
"How blessed are we that are not simple men! Yet nature might have made me as these are,","How blessed are we that are smart! Yet nature could have made me just like them, so I won’t treat them with contempt."
This cannot be but a great courtier.,He must be a great man at the court.
"His garments are rich, but he wears them not handsomely.","His garments look expensive, but he doesn’t wear them well."
He seems to be the more noble in being fantastical: on’s teeth.,His oddness makes him seem even more noble. I’ll bet that he’s a great man. I know by the toothpicks he uses Ornate toothpicks were fashionable at the time. toothpicks he uses .
The fardel there? what’s i’ the fardel? Wherefore that box?,What about that bundle there? What is in the bundle? And in the box?
"Sir, there lies such secrets in this fardel and box, shall know within this hour, if I may come to the speech of him.","Sir, the bundle and the box hold secrets that only the king may know, and which he’ll know within the hour if I can speak to him."
"Age, thou hast lost thy labour.","Old man, you have wasted your work."
"Why, sir?","Why, sir?"
"new ship to purge melancholy and air himself: for, if thou beest capable of things serious, thou must know the king is full of grief.","The king isn’t at the palace. He’s gone on a new ship to ease his sadness and to refresh himself. If you are able to grasp such serious things, you know that the king is full of grief."
"So ’tis said, sir; about his son, that should have","So it is said, sir, because his son meant to marry a shepherd’s daughter."
"If that shepherd be not in hand-fast, let him fly: the curses he shall have, the tortures he shall feel, will break the back of man, the heart of monster.","If the shepherd hasn’t been arrested already, he should flee. He’ll suffer curses so fierce and tortures so terrible that it would break the back of a man and the heart of even a monster."
"Think you so, sir?","Do you think so, sir?"
"and vengeance bitter; but those that are germane to him, though removed fifty times, shall all come under the hangman: which though it be great pity, yet it is necessary. An old sheep-whistling rogue a grace! Some say he shall be stoned; but that death is too soft for him, say I draw our throne into a sheep-cote! all deaths are too few, the sharpest too easy.","He won’t suffer these harsh and bitter punishments alone, either. All those who are related to him, even if they are very distant relatives, will hang, too. It’s a great pity, but it’s necessary. That an old shepherd and rogue would act as a broker and offer to have his daughter marry into the royal family! Some say he’ll be stoned, but that manner of death is too soft for someone who tried to drag the throne into a sheep’s pen! He can’t die too many times, or in too painful a way."
"Has the old man e’er a son, sir, do you hear, an’t",Have you heard if the old man has a son?
"He has a son, who shall be flayed alive; then ’nointed over with honey, set on the head of a wasp’s nest; then stand till he be three quarters and a dram dead; then recovered again with he is, and in the hottest day prognostication proclaims, shall he be set against a brick-wall, the sun looking with a southward eye upon him, where he is to behold him with flies blown to death. But what are to be smiled at, their offences being so capital? Tell me, for you seem to be honest plain men, what you have to the king: being something gently considered, I’ll bring you where he is whisper him in your behalfs; and if it be in man besides the king to effect your suits, here is man shall do it.","He has a son who will be whipped, then covered with honey and put on a wasp’s nest until he is three quarters of the way to death. Then he’ll be revived with liquor or some other hot drink. Then, raw as his flesh is, on the hottest day that can be predicted he’ll be set against a brick wall with the sun beating down upon him, and where he will be swarmed with flies. But why are we talking about these traitors, whose offences are so terrible that their misery should cause us happiness? Tell me, since you seem to be honest, ordinary men, what business do you have with the king? Since I’m well-respected at court, I’ll take you to his ship, bring you into his presence, and whisper to him a recommendation on your behalf. If there is any man beside the king who can help your case, that’s me."
"He seems to be of great authority: close with him, bear, yet he is oft led by the nose with gold: show the inside of your purse to the outside of his hand, and no more ado. Remember ‘stoned,’ and ‘flayed alive.’","He seems to have a great deal of authority. Approach him and give his some money. No matter how stubborn and untamable authority may be, a little money can make him docile. Let him put his hand into your purse, and no more fuss. Remember: “stoned,” and “flayed alive.”"
"An’t please you, sir, to undertake the business for more and leave this young man in pawn till I bring it you.","If it pleases you, sir, to take on this business for us, here is all the gold I have. I’ll pay you an equal amount more, and I’ll leave you this young man as a guarantee until I can bring the rest to you."
After I have done what I promised?,After I have done what I have promised?
"Ay, sir.","Yes, sir."
"Well, give me the moiety. Are you a party in this business?","Well then, give me the first half. Are you part of this deal?"
"one, I hope I shall not be flayed out of it.","In a way, sir. But even if my skin is pitiful, I hope I won’t be whipped out of it."
"O, that’s the case of the shepherd’s son: hang him, he’ll be made an example.","Oh no, that’s what will happen to the shepherd’s son. He’ll be hanged as an example."
"Comfort, good comfort! We must to the king and show daughter nor my sister; we are gone else. Sir, I will give you as much as this old man does when the business is performed, and remain, as he says, your pawn till it be brought you.","(to the Shepherd) What a comfort! We must go to the king and show him our amazing proof. He must know that Perdita isn’t your daughter or my sister, or we’ll be dead. (to Autolycus) Sir, I will give you as much money as this old man does once the business is concluded, and until then, I’ll stay with you as a guarantee for payment."
go on the right hand: I will but look upon the hedge and follow you.,I trust you. Walk straight ahead toward the sea. Go along the right hand side of the road. I just need to go to the bathroom and I’ll follow you.
"We are blest in this man, as I may say, even blest.","We’re blessed to have this man with us, I say, blessed."
Let’s before as he bids us: he was provided to do us good.,Let’s go before he has to tell us again. He was put here to help us.
"not suffer me: she drops booties in my mouth. I am courted now with a double occasion, gold and a means to do the prince my master good; which who knows how that may turn back to my advancement? I will bring think it fit to shore them again and that the complaint they have to the king concerns him nothing, let him call me rogue for being so far officious; for I am proof against that title and them: there may be matter in it.","Even if I wanted to be honest, I see Fate wouldn’t let me. She drops profits right in my pocket. I have two opportunities here: to get gold and to do something good for my master the prince—and who knows how that will help me in the future. I will bring these two gullible men aboard the ship with him. If he thinks their complaint to the king has nothing to do with him and wants to put them back on shore again, let him call me a rogue for being so interfering. I can’t be hurt by that name, or any shame attached to it. I’ll present them to him. There might be money in it."
"Sir, you have done enough, and have perform’d A saint-like sorrow: no fault could you make, Which you have not redeem’d; indeed, paid down More penitence than done trespa at the last, With them forgive yourself.","(to Leontes) Sir, you have done enough and have shown the sorrow and piety of a saint. You have redeemed every mistake you might have made, and have paid more penance than you have done wrong. At last, forgive your sins as Heaven has forgiven it, and forgive yourself."
"Whilst I remember Her and her virtues, I cannot forget My blemishes in them, and so still think of That heirless it hath made my kingdom and Destroy’d the sweet’st companion that e’er man Bred his hopes out of.","As long as I remember her and her virtue, I can’t forget how I attacked them, and I still think of the wrong I did. My misbehavior was so terrible that it has left my kingdom without an heir and destroyed the sweetest companion that a man could hope would bear his children."
"True, too true, my lord: Or from the all that are took something good, To make a perfect woman, she you kill’d Would be unparallel’d.","It is too true, my lord. Even if you wedded every woman in the world one by one, or took the best quality from each and made the perfect woman, the woman you killed couldn’t be matched."
"I think so. Kill’d! Sorely, to say I did; it is as bitter Upon thy tongue as in my thought: now, good now, Say so but seldom.","I think so, too. Killed! The woman I killed! I did, but you wound me deeply to say it so bluntly. You say it as bitterly as I think it. Now, please, don’t say it often."
"Not at all, good lady: Have done the time more benefit and graced Your kindness better.","Never say that, good lady. There are a thousand other things you could have said that would have been of greater benefit and would have made you seem kinder."
You are one of those Would have him wed again.,You are one of the people who want him to marry again.
"You pity not the state, nor the remembrance Of his most sovereign name; consider little What dangers, by his highness’ fail of issue, May drop upon his kingdom and devour Than to rejoice the former queen is well? What holier than, for royalty’s repair, For present comfort and for future good, To bless the bed of majesty again","If you wouldn’t have him marry again, you don’t care anything for the state, or for the continuance of his royal name. Think about what dangers might befall his kingdom, and how anxious citizens might suffer, if he doesn’t have a son. What is more virtuous than to rejoice that the former queen is in heaven? What would be holier than the king producing a child to restore the royal family and to make the realm safe and happy for the present and the future?"
"There is none worthy, Respecting her that’s gone. Besides, the gods Will have fulfill’d their secret purposes; For has not the divine Apollo said, That King Leontes shall not have an heir Till his lost child be found? which that it shall, Is all as monstrous to our human reason As my Antigonus to break his grave Did perish with the infant. ’Tis your counsel My lord should to the heavens be contrary, Oppose against their wills.","There is no one worthy to take the place of the queen who is gone. Besides, the gods are fulfilling their intentions. Didn’t divine Apollo say, through the words of his oracle, that King Leontes should not have an heir until his lost child is found? And that seems as unlikely as the notion that my Antigonus, whom I am sure died along with my infant, will rise from his grave and return to me. Your advice is that my lord should go against the heavens and oppose their wills."
Care not for issue; Left his to the worthiest; so his successor Was like to be the best.,"Don’t worry about a son. The crown will find an heir. Great Alexander left his kingdom to the worthiest of his followers, so that his successor would be the best leader possible."
"Good Paulina, Who hast the memory of Hermione, Had squared me to thy counsel! then, even now, I might have look’d upon my queen’s full eyes, Have taken treasure from her lips—","Good Paulina, I know you honor the memory of Hermione. I wish that I had listened to you! Then I would now be able to look into my queen’s eyes and kiss her treasured lips—"
And left them,And been the richer for having done so.
"Thou speak’st truth. No more such wives; therefore, no wife: one worse, And better used, would make her sainted spirit Again possess her corpse, and on this stage, And begin, ‘Why to me?’","You speak the truth. No wife such as that exists, so there will be no wife. For me to take a wife less perfect, and to treat her better, would make Hermione’s ghost arise again, and she’d appear here to me and say, “Why insult me like this?”"
"Had she such power, She had just cause.","If she were able to, she’d be justified."
She had; and would incense me,"She would be, and she’d drive me to murder the woman I married in her place."
"I should so. Were I the ghost that walk’d, I’ld bid you mark Her eye, and tell me for what dull part in’t You chose her; then I’ld shriek, that even your ears Should be ‘Remember mine.’","I should think so. If I were Hermione’s ghost, I’d tell you to look at that new woman’s eyes and tell me what about their dullness attracted you. Then I’d shriek, and your ears would hurt to hear me. And then I’d say, “Remember my eyes.”"
"Stars, stars, And all eyes else dead coals! Fear thou no wife; I’ll have no wife, Paulina.","They were like stars, and next to them all other eyes look like dead coals! Don’t fear, Paulina, I won’t take another wife."
Never to marry but by my free leave?,Will you swear to never marry unless I give you my permission?
"Never, Paulina; so be blest my spirit!","Never, Paulina, on my life!"
"Then, good my lords, bear witness to his oath.","Then, my good lords, witness his oath."
You tempt him over-much.,You test him too much.
"As like Hermione as is her picture, Affront his eye—",Unless he sees another woman who looks as much like Hermione as her picture—
"Good madam,—",Good madam—
"I have done. No remedy, but you will,—give me the office To choose you a queen: she shall not be so young As was your former; but she shall be such As, walk’d your first queen’s ghost, To see her in your arms.","I’m done. Yet, if my lord decides to marry despite everything, let me choose your queen. She won’t be as young as your former wife, but she’ll be someone who even your first queen would rejoice to see in your arms."
"My true Paulina, We shall not marry till thou bid’st us.","My faithful Paulina, I won’t marry until you tell me to."
That Never till then.,"That will be when your first queen is alive again, not until then."
"One that gives out himself Prince Florizel, Son of Polixenes, with his princess, she The fairest I have yet beheld, desires access","A man who calls himself Prince Florizel, son of Polixenes, asks to see you. With him is his princess, who is the fairest lady I have ever seen."
"What with him? he comes not Like to his father’s greatne his approach, So out of circumstance and sudden, tells us ’Tis not a visitation framed, but forced","What is this? He arrives without the ceremony someone of his station requires. That he appears so suddenly and unexpectedly tells me that it wasn’t a planned visit, but one forced by circumstances. How many does he have with him?"
"But few, And those but mean.","Only a few, and those of rather low rank."
"His princess, say you, with him?",You say his princess is with him?
"Ay, the most peerless piece of earth, I think,","Yes, and she is the most incomparable woman that the sun has ever shone upon."
"O Hermione, As every present time doth boast itself Above a better gone, so must thy grave Give way to what’s seen now! Sir, you yourself Is colder than that theme, ‘She had not been, Nor was not to be equall’d;’—thus your verse Flow’d with her beauty once: ’tis shrewdly ebb’d, To say you have seen a better.","Oh, Hermione, just as every era thinks it’s better than the one past, so must you make way for a new woman. Sir, you yourself have said and written that she was never, and never would be, equaled in beauty, but now you change your mind. Your poetry was once filled with reports of her beauty, but it must have declined since you say that you have seen someone more beautiful."
"The one I have almost forgot,—your pardon,— The other, when she has obtain’d your eye, Will have your tongue too. This is a creature, Would she begin a sect, might quench the zeal Of who she but bid follow.","Pardon, madam. I’m sorry to say I’ve almost forgotten Hermione. When you see this other woman, you’ll be speechless, too. If she started her own religion, it would put an end to the zeal of any other and make followers of anyone she called."
How! not women?,"What? Not women, though?"
"Women will love her, that she is a woman More worth than any man; men, that she is",Women will love her because she is a woman more worthy than any man. Men will love her because she is the most exceptional of women.
"Go, Cleomenes; Yourself, assisted with your honour’d friends, Bring them to our embracement.","Go, Cleomenes. With the help of your friends, bring them back here for my welcome."
"Still, ’tis strange","Still, it is strange that he comes to us so suddenly."
"Had our prince, Jewel of children, seen this hour, he had pair’d Well with this lord: there was not full a month Between their births.","If your prince, the most prized of children, were alive to see this, he would have gotten along well with this lord. They were born less than a month apart."
"He dies to me again when talk’d of: sure, When I shall see this gentleman, thy speeches Will bring me to consider that which may Unfurnish me of reason. They are come.","Please, no more. Stop. You know it’s like he dies again for me when you talk about him. When I see this gentleman, your words will make me think of that which makes me go mad. They are here."
"For she did print your royal father off, Conceiving you: were I but twenty-one, Your father’s image is so hit in you, His very air, that I should call you brother, By us perform’d before. Most dearly welcome! And your fair princess,—goddess!—O, alas! I lost a couple, that ’twixt heaven and earth Might thus have stood begetting wonder as All mine own folly—the society, Amity too, of your brave father, whom, Though bearing misery, I desire my life Once more to look on him.","Your mother was a faithful wife, prince, because in bearing you she has produced a copy of your royal father. You look and act so much like your father that if I were twenty-one, I’d call you brother just like I called him, and speak of some wild escapade we’d gotten into. You are very welcome here, and your fair princess, like a goddess! Oh, alas, I’ve lost two who might have stood there, too, in wonderment, as you do. And then through my own folly I lost the company and friendship of your brave father, whom I wish I could see once more in this lifetime, even if it caused me sadness."
"Have I here touch’d Sicilia and from him Give you all greetings that a king, at friend, Can send his brother: and, but infirmity Which waits upon worn times hath something seized The lands and waters ’twixt your throne and his Measured to look upon you; whom he loves— He bade me say so—more than all the sceptres And those that bear them living.","I’ve come to Sicilia at his command, and I bring from him all the greetings that a king and a friend can send to his brother. If it weren’t for the infirmity of age that somewhat hinders him, he would travel here himself to greet you. He told me to tell you that he loves you, more than all the other kings alive."
"Good gentleman! the wrongs I have done thee stir Afresh within me, and these thy offices, So rarely kind, are as interpreters Of my behind-hand slackness. Welcome hither, Exposed this paragon to the fearful usage, At least ungentle, of the dreadful Neptune, To greet a man not worth her pains, much less The adventure of her person?","Oh, my brother, good gentleman! I feel the wrongs I’ve done to him all over again. And your exceptional kindness shows me how slow I’ve been in greeting you. You are as welcome here as the spring is to the earth. And has he sent this most lovely woman here, too, across the dangerous and rough sea, to greet an unworthy man?"
She came from Libya.,"My lord, she came from Libya."
"Where the warlike Smalus, That noble honour’d lord, is fear’d and loved?","Where the fierce Smalus, that honorable lord, is both feared and loved?"
"Most royal sir, from thence; from him, whose daughter A prosperous south-wind friendly, we have cross’d, To execute the charge my father gave me For visiting your highne my best train I have from your Sicilian shores dismiss’d; Not only my success in Libya, sir, But my arrival and my wife’s in safety Here where we are.","Most royal sir, from there, and from her father, who cried at her departure. From there, with a good south wind, we have crossed the sea to carry out my father’s request to visit you. I have sent the best men of my entourage back to Bohemia, to let my father know both that my trip to Libya was successful and that my wife and I arrived here safely."
"The blessed gods Do climate here! You have a holy father, A graceful gentleman; against whose person, So sacred as it is, I have done sin: For which the heavens, taking angry note, As he from heaven merits it, with you Worthy his goodness. What might I have been, Might I a son and daughter now have look’d on, Such goodly things as you!","May the gods keep the air fresh and healthy while you are here! You have a great and graceful father, against whom I have committed a sin. In return, the angry heavens have left me childless, while your father is blessed by heaven with you, as he deserves. What might my life have been like if I had a son and daughter as lovely as you two to look at!"
"That which I shall report will bear no credit, Were not the proof so nigh. Please you, great sir, Bohemia greets you from himself by me; Desires you to attach his son, who has— Fled from his father, from his hopes, and with A shepherd’s daughter.","Most noble sir, if I didn’t have such firm proof you wouldn’t believe what I’m about to tell you. Sir, Polixenes himself greets you through me. He asks you to hold his son, who has abandoned his royal status and responsibilities, and who has fled from his father and his hope of the throne with a shepherd’s daughter."
Where’s Bohemia? speak.,Where is Polixenes? Tell me.
"Here in your city; I now came from him: My marvel and my message. To your court Whiles he was hastening, in the chase, it seems, Of this fair couple, meets he on the way The father of this seeming lady and With this young prince.","Here in your city. I just came from him. I’m astonished, as suits my message. It seems that while he was hurrying here to your court in pursuit of this fair couple, he met the father and brother of the lady, who had both left their country with the prince."
Camillo has betray’d me; Whose honour and whose honesty till now Endured all weathers.,"Camillo has betrayed me, though his honor and honesty had been steadfast until now."
He’s with the king your father.,"You may charge him with that yourself. He’s with the king, your father."
Who? Camillo?,Who? Camillo?
"Camillo, sir; I spake with him; who now Has these poor men in question. Never saw I Forswear themselves as often as they speak: Bohemia stops his ears, and threatens them With divers deaths in death.","Camillo, sir. I spoke with him, and he now has the poor men in question. I’ve never seen anyone tremble as they do. They kneel, and kiss the earth, and take back what they’ve said every time they speak. Polixenes refuses to listen and threatens them with various tortures."
O my poor father! Our contract celebrated.,"Oh, my poor father! The heavens set spies on us and refuse to let us celebrate our vows."
You are married?,You are married?
"We are not, sir, nor are we like to be; The stars, I see, will kiss the valleys first:","We aren’t, sir, and it seems impossible that we will be. I see that the stars will fall to the earth first. Chance works equally for the high- and the lowborn."
"My lord, Is this the daughter of a king?","My lord, is this the daughter of a king?"
"She is, When once she is my wife.","She will be, once she is my wife."
"Will come on very slowly. I am sorry, Most sorry, you have broken from his liking Where you were tied in duty, and as sorry Your choice is not so rich in worth as beauty,","I think that “once” will not be soon, given your father’s speed in coming here. I am very sorry that you have gone against his wishes and your duty, and as sorry that your lady isn’t as rich in rank as she is in beauty, so that you could marry her."
"Dear, look up: Though Fortune, visible an enemy, Should chase us with my father, power no jot Hath she to change our loves. Beseech you, sir, Than I do now: with thought of such affections, Step forth mine advocate; at your request My father will grant precious things as trifles.","Dear, cheer up. Even if Fate, which is apparently our enemy, has chased us with my father, she has no power to change our love for each other. Please, sir, remember when you were my age. Thinking of such love, come forward in my defense. If you request it, my father will grant precious things as though they were nothing."
"Would he do so, I’ld beg your precious mistress,",I’d beg your precious mistress’s pardon if he counted her as nothing.
"Sir, my liege, Your eye hath too much youth in’t: not a month ’Fore your queen died, she was more worth such gazes Than what you look on now.","My lord, you are too dazzled by youth. Your queen deserved those admiring glances more than this woman only a month before she died."
Even in these looks I made.,"I thought of her, even as I looked upon this woman."
"But your petition Is yet unanswer’d. I will to your father: Your honour not o’erthrown by your desires, I now go toward him; therefore follow me And mark what way I make: come, good my lord.","But I haven’t answered your request. I will tell your father that you haven’t let your desire to marry this girl overwhelm your honor. I support both you and your wish. I’ll go to him now on this errand. Follow me, and watch where I go. Come, my lord."
"Beseech you, sir, were you present at this relation?","Please, sir, were you there when it was revealed?"
"I was by at the opening of the fardel, heard the old shepherd deliver the manner how he found it: whereupon, after a little amazedness, we were all heard the shepherd say, he found the child.","I was there when the bundle was opened, and heard the old shepherd tell how he found it. Then, after some shock, we were all told to leave the room. But as I went, I thought I heard the shepherd say he found the child."
I would most gladly know the issue of it.,I would love to know the result of it.
"I make a broken delivery of the business; but the changes I perceived in the king and Camillo were staring on one another, to tear the cases of their eyes; there was speech in their dumbness, language in their very gesture; they looked as they had heard of a world ransomed, or one destroyed: a notable beholder, that knew no more but seeing, could not say if the importance were joy or sorrow; but in the extremity of the one, it must needs be.","I could only hear bits and pieces of the conversation. But I could hear the king and Camillo speaking in tones of admiration. They looked at each other so intently and with such astonishment that it seemed as if their eyes might pop out. Even their inability to speak communicated something, and so did their gestures. They looked as if the world had been taken hostage, or destroyed. They were obviously amazed. But even the most astute observer would be unable to say if it was joy or sorrow they felt, though obviously a great deal of one or the other."
Here comes a gentleman that haply knows more.,"Here comes a gentleman who perhaps knows more. Any news, Rogero?"
Nothing but bonfires: the oracle is fulfilled; the king’s daughter is found: such a deal of wonder is broken out within this hour that ballad-makers cannot be able to express it.,Only of celebration. The oracle is fulfilled. The king’s daughter is found. So many amazing things have happened this hour that ballad-makers won’t be able to express them Ballads were often composed about sensational events. ballad-makers won’t be able to express them .
"deliver you more. How goes it now, sir? this news which is called true is so like an old tale, that the verity of it is in strong suspicion: has the king found his heir?",Here comes Lady Paulina’s servant. He can tell you more. What’s happening now? This true story seems so much like a fable that it’s hard to believe. Has the king found his heir?
"circumstance: that which you hear you’ll swear you see, there is such unity in the proofs. The mantle of Queen Hermione’s, her jewel about the neck of it, the letters of Antigonus found with it which they creature in resemblance of the mother, the affection of nobleness which nature shows above her breeding, and many other evidences proclaim her with all certainty to be the king’s daughter. Did you see","It’s very true, if truth was ever proven by evidence. All the stories match up and are consistent. It all shows that Perdita is certainly the king’s daughter— the cloak of Queen Hermione, the jewel that was found around her neck, letters in Antigonus’s handwriting found with her, how much she looks like her mother, her noble bearing, which shows her to be more than a shepherd’s daughter, and many other things. Did you see the meeting of the two kings?"
No.,No.
"Then have you lost a sight, which was to be seen, cannot be spoken of. There might you have beheld one joy crown another, so and in such manner that it joy waded in tears. There was casting up of eyes, holding up of hands, with countenances of such distraction that they were to be known by garment, not by favour. Our king, being ready to leap out of joy were now become a loss, cries ‘O, thy mother, thy mother!’ then asks Bohemia forgiveness; then embraces his son-in-law; then again worries he his daughter with clipping her; now he thanks the old conduit of many kings’ reigns. I never heard of such another encounter, which lames report to follow it and undoes description to do it.","Then you’ve missed something indescribable. You would have seen one joy upon another. It was so emotional that they both wept. They raised their eyes to heaven, clasped hands, and their faces were so contorted with emotion that you could only recognize them by their clothing. Our king, overcome with joy at having found his daughter, cried out, “Oh, your mother, your mother,” as if that joy had become a loss. Then he asked Polixenes for forgiveness, then embraced his son-in-law, and then harassed his daughter with embraces. Then he thanks the old shepherd, who stands there weeping like a stone statue. I’ve never heard of such an event. It’s impossible to tell what happen, or to describe it."
"What, pray you, became of Antigonus, that carried","What became of Antigonus, who carried away the child?"
"Like an old tale still, which will have matter to rehearse, though credit be asleep and not an ear open. He was torn to pieces with a bear: this avouches the shepherd’s son; who has not only his handkerchief and rings of his that Paulina knows.","That itself is like an old story, which will take effort to recount and is hard to believe. He was torn to pieces by a bear. The shepherd’s son swears so, and not only does he seem innocent enough to be believed, but he also has a handkerchief and rings that Paulina recognized as belonging to Antingonus."
What became of his bark and his followers?,What happened to his ship and his companions?
"Wrecked the same instant of their master’s death and in the view of the shepherd: so that all the even then lost when it was found. But O, the noble combat that ’twixt joy and sorrow was fought in Paulina! She had one eye declined for the loss of her husband, another elevated that the oracle was and so locks her in embracing, as if she would pin her to her heart that she might no more be in danger of losing.","They were wrecked at the same time their master was killed. The shepherd saw it happen. So all those who helped exile the child were lost. Paulina was caught between joy and sorrow! She was saddened at the loss of her husband but elated that the oracle was fulfilled. She lifted the princess in a hug, as if she could pin her to her heart so as never to lose her again."
The dignity of this act was worth the audience of,"This is a scene worthy of an audience of kings and princes, who were also the actors in it."
"One of the prettiest touches of all and that which angled for mine eyes, caught the water though not the fish, was when, at the relation of the queen’s death, with the manner how she came to’t bravely attentiveness wounded his daughter; till, from one sign of dolour to another, she did, with an ‘Alas,’ I would fain say, bleed tears, for I am sure my heart wept blood. Who was most marble there changed could have seen ’t, the woe had been universal.","One of the most moving things of all, which brought me to tears, was when the king bravely and sadly told his daughter how the queen died. How intently Perdita listened! She went from sorrow to sorrow, and finally said, “Alas,” and seemed to bleed tears. I would say my heart nearly broke. Even the most hardened onlooker was affected. Some fainted, and all mourned. If the world could have seen it, everyone would have felt sorrow."
Are they returned to the court?,Have they returned to the court?
"No: the princess hearing of her mother’s statue, which is in the keeping of Paulina,—a piece many Italian master, Julio Romano, who, had he himself eternity and could put breath into his work, would beguile Nature of her custom, so perfectly he is her ape: he so near to Hermione hath done Hermione that answer: thither with all greediness of affection are they gone, and there they intend to sup.","No. The princess heard that Paulina keeps a statue of her mother that was made over many years and just recently finished. It was done by that Italian master, Julio Romano, who makes his subjects so close to life that, if he could breathe life into his statues, he would replace Nature. He has replicated Hermione so closely that they say that you might speak to her and expect an answer. They’ve gone to see it, and they intend to dine there."
"I thought she had some great matter there in hand; for she hath privately twice or thrice a day, ever house. Shall we thither and with our company piece the rejoicing?","I thought Paulina had some important business there. Ever since Hermione died, she has visited that remote place privately two or three times a day. Shall we go there and join the celebration?"
Who would be thence that has the benefit of access? every wink of an eye some new grace will be born: Let’s along.,Who wouldn’t go who has access? Every moment you look will show a new wonder. Our absence will make us poorer in knowledge. Let’s go.
"Now, had I not the dash of my former life in me, would preferment drop on my head. I brought the old man and his son aboard the prince: told him I heard at that time, overfond of the shepherd’s daughter, so he then took her to be, who began to be much sea-sick, and himself little better, extremity of weather continuing, this mystery remained been the finder out of this secret, it would not have relished among my other discredits.","Now, if I didn’t have a trace of my former life in me, the king would favor me. I brought the old man and his son aboard with the prince, and told him I heard them talk about a bundle and so on. But he was distracted by his fondness for the shepherd’s daughter, who he still thought her to be at the time, and with the bad weather they both began to suffer from sea-sickness. The mystery remained undiscovered. But it’s all the same to me. If I had revealed this secret, it wouldn’t have gone well with my other misdeeds."
"Here come those I have done good to against my will, and already appearing in the blossoms of their fortune.","Here come those men I have helped against my will, and they already are enjoying their good fortune."
daughters will be all gentlemen born.,"Come, my boy. I won’t have any more children, but your sons and daughters will be the children of a gentleman."
"You are well met, sir. You denied to fight with me this other day, because I was no gentleman born. See you these clothes? say you see them not and these robes are not gentlemen born: give me the lie, do, and try whether I am not now a gentleman born.","(to Autolycus) Good to see you, sir. You refused to fight me the other day because I wasn’t a gentleman’s son. Do you see these clothes? Tell me you don’t see them and still think I’m not a gentleman’s son. You’d be better off saying these clothes aren’t from a gentleman. Lie to me, and see whether I’m not a gentleman’s son."
"I know you are now, sir, a gentleman born.","Now I know you are a gentleman, sir."
"Ay, and have been so any time these four hours.","Yes, and have been so for these past four hours."
"And so have I, boy.","And I’ve been, too, boy."
"So you have: but I was a gentleman born before my father; for the king’s son took me by the hand, and called me brother; and then the two kings called my father brother; and then the prince my brother and so we wept, and there was the first gentleman-like tears that ever we shed.","You have. But I became a gentleman before my father, because the king’s son took me by the hand and called me “brother.” Then the two kings called my father “brother.” And then my brother the prince, and my sister the princess called my father “father.” And so we all wept, and those were the first tears we shed as gentlemen."
"We may live, son, to shed many more.","May we live to shed many more, son."
"Ay; or else ’twere hard luck, being in so","Yes, or it would be tough luck, being in such preposterous state The Yokel confuses preposterous with prosperous, thus inadvertently mocking his rise in social rank. preposterous state as we are."
"I humbly beseech you, sir, to pardon me all the faults I have committed to your worship and to give me your good report to the prince my master.","I humbly beg you, sir, to forgive me for all the ways I have offended you, and to speak well of me to the prince, my master."
"Prithee, son, do; for we must be gentle, now we are","Yes, son, do so. We have to be gentle, now that we are gentlemen."
Thou wilt amend thy life?,You’ll reform yourself?
"Ay, an it like your good worship.","Yes, as it pleases you."
Give me thy hand: I will swear to the prince thou art as honest a true fellow as any is in Bohemia.,Give me your hand. I will swear to the prince that you are as honest as any man in Bohemia.
"You may say it, but not swear it.","You may say it, but don’t swear it."
"Not swear it, now I am a gentleman? Let boors and franklins say it, I’ll swear it.","Don’t swear it, now that I am a gentleman? Let peasants and farmers simply say it. I’ll swear it."
"How if it be false, son?","What if it turns out to be untrue, son?"
"If it be ne’er so false, a true gentleman may swear the prince thou art a tall fellow of thy hands and that thou wilt not be drunk; but I know thou art no tall fellow of thy hands and that thou wilt be drunk: but I’ll swear it, and I would thou wouldst","Even if it’s untrue, a true gentleman will swear it on behalf of his friend. (to Autolycus) And I’ll swear to the prince that you are a brave man of action and that you won’t be drunk. I know you aren’t a brave man of action and that you will be drunk. But I’ll swear it, and I hope you’ll be a brave man of action."
"I will prove so, sir, to my power.","I’ll do my best to prove so, sir."
"Ay, by any means prove a tall fellow: if I do not wonder how thou darest venture to be drunk, not being a tall fellow, trust me not. Hark! the kings queen’s picture. Come, follow us: we’ll be thy good masters.","Yes, prove yourself a brave fellow. If I’m not amazed how you dare to be drunk, not being a brave man myself, don’t trust me. (noise off-stage) Look! The kings and the princess, our family, are going to see the queen’s statue. Come, follow us. We’ll be your kind masters."
"O grave and good Paulina, the great comfort That I have had of thee!","Oh, serious and good Paulina, you have given me great comfort."
"What, sovereign sir, I did not well I meant well. All my services With your crown’d brother and these your contracted Heirs of your kingdoms, my poor house to visit, It is a surplus of your grace, which never My life may last to answer.","Sir, even if I didn’t always succeed in doing well, I always meant well. You’ve repaid all my services. The fact that you’ve vowed to visit my poor house with your royal brother and the heirs of each of your kingdoms shows your immense grace, which I’ll never be able to repay."
"We honour you with trouble: but we came To see the statue of our queen: your gallery Have we pass’d through, not without much content In many singularities; but we saw not The statue of her mother.","Oh, Paulina, we honor you by disturbing you. But we came to see the statue of my queen. We’ve passed through your gallery, which has many amazing items, but we didn’t see what my daughter came to see: the statue of her mother."
"As she lived peerless, So her dead likeness, I do well believe, Excels whatever yet you look’d upon Lonely, apart. But here it is: prepare To see the life as lively mock’d as ever Still sleep mock’d death: behold, and say ’tis well.","Just as she was without peer in life, I believe that her dead statue is more beautiful that anything you’ve seen or that man has created. So I keep it apart from the others. But here it is. Prepare to see life mimicked as well as sleep mimics death. Look, and say it is beautiful."
"I like your silence, it the more shows off Comes it not something near?","I like your silence. It shows how awed you are. But you, my lord, answer first—doesn’t it look like her?"
"Her natural posture! Chide me, dear stone, that I may say indeed Thou art Hermione; or rather, thou art she As infancy and grace. But yet, Paulina, Hermione was not so much wrinkled, nothing So aged as this seems.","Just as she stood! Reprimand me, dear stone, that I say that you are indeed Hermione. Or rather, don’t reprimand me, since you are so like her and she had a tender nature. But still, Paulina, Hermione wasn’t this wrinkled and not as old as this statue appears."
"O, not by much.","Oh, not at all."
Which lets go by some sixteen years and makes her As she lived now.,"That shows how excellent the sculptor is. He thinks about what she would look like now, sixteen years having passed, and makes her look as though she lived now."
"As now she might have done, So much to my good comfort, as it is Even with such life of majesty, warm life, As now it coldly stands, when first I woo’d her! I am ashamed: does not the stone rebuke me For being more stone than it? O royal piece, My evils conjured to remembrance and From thy admiring daughter took the spirits, Standing like stone with thee.","This statue comforts me now, as she might have done, as much as it pains me to look at it. Oh, when I first courted her she stood just this way, with as much majesty and warmth as this stone has coldness. I am ashamed. Doesn’t the stone chastise me for being colder than it is? Oh, royal piece of art, there’s magic in your regal appearance, which has brought all my foul deeds to mind and has made your admiring daughter stand as still as stone like you."
"And give me leave, I kneel and then implore her blessing. Lady, Dear queen, that ended when I but began, Give me that hand of yours to kiss.","Let me kneel and implore her blessing, and don’t say it is superstition. Lady, dear queen, who died just as I was beginning to live, give me your hand to kiss."
"O, patience! Not dry.","Oh, wait! The statue is still new, and the paint isn’t dry."
"My lord, your sorrow was too sore laid on, Which sixteen winters cannot blow away, So many summers dry; scarce any joy But kill’d itself much sooner.","My lord, your sorrow is too deep. Sixteen winters haven’t blown it away, and many summers haven’t dried it. No joy lives that long, and neither has any sorrow."
"Dear my brother, Let him that was the cause of this have power To take off so much grief from you as he","My dear brother, since I was a cause of this situation, let me take some grief from you to make a part of myself."
"Indeed, my lord, If I had thought the sight of my poor image Would thus have wrought you,—for the stone is mine— I’ld not have show’d it.","Indeed, my lord, if I had thought seeing this poor statue would have made you so distraught, I wouldn’t have shown it to you. (She moves to close the curtain.)"
Do not draw the curtain.,Don’t draw the curtain.
"No longer shall you gaze on’t, lest your fancy May think anon it moves.","Don’t look at it any longer, or you’ll imagine soon that it moves."
"Let be, let be. Would I were dead, but that, methinks, already— Would you not deem it breathed? and that those veins Did verily bear blood?","Let it be. If only I were dead, but I think already— Who made it? Look, my lord, wouldn’t you say it took a breath? And that those veins were filled with blood?"
Masterly done: The very life seems warm upon her lip.,It’s masterfully done. Her mouth seems warmed with breath.
As we are mock’d with art.,"Her eyes seem to move, as though we are mocked by art."
I’ll draw the curtain: My lord’s almost so far transported that He’ll think anon it lives.,I’ll draw the curtain. My lord is so overwhelmed that soon he’ll think it lives.
Make me to think so twenty years together! No settled senses of the world can match The pleasure of that madness. Let ’t alone.,"Oh, sweet Paulina, make me think so for twenty more years! No sanity would match the pleasure of that madness. Leave it alone."
"I am sorry, sir, I have thus far stirr’d you: but","I’m sorry, sir, that I’ve made you so agitated, but to leave it would make it worse."
"Do, Paulina; For this affliction has a taste as sweet As any cordial comfort. Still, methinks, There is an air comes from her: what fine chisel For I will kiss her.","Do leave it, Paulina. This agitation is as sweet as any revitalizing comfort. Still, I think air is coming from her. What amazing artist could cut breath from stone? Don’t let anyone make fun of me, but I will kiss her."
"Good my lord, forbear: The ruddiness upon her lip is wet; You’ll mar it if you kiss it, stain your own","Don’t do it, my lord. The red of her lips is wet. You’ll ruin it if you kiss it, and you’ll get your own lips covered in oil paint. Shall I draw the curtain?"
"No, not these twenty years.","No, not for twenty years."
"So long could I Stand by, a looker on.","I could stand here that long, looking at her."
"Either forbear, For more amazement. If you can behold it, I’ll make the statue move indeed, descend And take you by the hand; but then you’ll think— Which I protest against—I am assisted","Either resist the temptation and leave the chapel, or prepare yourselves for more amazement. If you can take it, I’ll make the statue move, step down from her pedestal, and take you by the hand. But then you’ll think I’m a witch, though I swear I am not."
"What you can make her do, I am content to look on: what to speak, I am content to hear; for ’tis as easy To make her speak as move.","Whatever you can make her do, I’m happy to watch. Whatever you can make her say, I’m happy to hear, because it must be as easy to make her speak as it is to make her move."
"You do awake your faith. Then all stand still; On: those that think it is unlawful business I am about, let them depart.","It’s necessary that you have faith. So everyone hold still, and anyone who thinks this is bad business should leave now."
Proceed:,Go ahead. No one will move.
"Music, awake her; strike!","Music, wake her!"
"’Tis time; descend; be stone no more; approach; Strike all that look upon with marvel. Come, I’ll fill your grave up: stir, nay, come away, Dear life redeems you. You perceive she stirs:","It’s time. Come down, and no longer be stone. Come forward. Make everyone who looks at you be amazed. Come, I’ll fill up your grave. Move, no, move away, let Death have your numbness since life is taking you from him That is, from Death. him . You see she moves."
Start not; her actions shall be holy as You hear my spell is lawful: do not shun her Until you see her die again; for then When she was young you woo’d her; now in age Is she become the suitor?,"Don’t jump. Her actions are pure, and this spell is no evil enchantment. Don’t shun her, because if you do, you’ll kill her all over again. No, put your hand forward. You courted her when she was young. Now in old age does she have to court you?"
"O, she’s warm! If this be magic, let it be an art","Oh, she’s warm! If this is magic, it should be as ordinary as eating."
She embraces him.,She embraces him.
She hangs about his neck: If she pertain to life let her speak too.,"She hugs him. If she is really alive let her speak, too."
"Ay, and make’t manifest where she has lived,","Yes, and tell us where she has lived, or how she’s come back to life."
"That she is living, Were it but told you, should be hooted at Like an old tale: but it appears she lives, Though yet she speak not. Mark a little while. And pray your mother’s blessing. Turn, good lady; Our Perdita is found.","If you were told she was alive, you would consider it a fable. But it seems she is alive, even though she doesn’t speak. Look for a while. (to Perdita) Please, intervene, fair madam. Kneel down and ask for your mother’s blessing. Look, good lady—our Perdita is found."
"You gods, look down And from your sacred vials pour your graces Where hast thou been preserved? where lived? how found Thy father’s court? for thou shalt hear that I, Knowing by Paulina that the oracle Gave hope thou wast in being, have preserved","You gods, look down and pour your blessings upon my daughter’s head! Tell me, my child, where have you been kept safe? Where have you lived? How did you find yourself in your father’s court? Paulina told me the oracle gave hope that you were still alive, so I stayed alive to see you someday."
"There’s time enough for that; Lest they desire upon this push to trouble Your joys with like relation. Go together, You precious winners all; your exultation Will wing me to some wither’d bough and there My mate, that’s never to be found again, Lament till I am lost.","There’s enough time for that later, and they might want you to answer the same questions. Go together, you happy people, and all rejoice. Like an old turtledove, I’ll take myself off to a solitary bough and mourn my husband, who will never be found again."
"O, peace, Paulina! As I by thine a wife: this is a match, And made between’s by vows. Thou hast found mine; But how, is to be question’d; for I saw her, As I thought, dead, and have in vain said many For him, I partly know his mind—to find thee An honourable husband. Come, Camillo, And take her by the hand, whose worth and honesty Is richly noted and here justified What! look upon my brother: both your pardons, That e’er I put between your holy looks My ill suspicion. This is your son-in-law, And son unto the king, who, heavens directing, Lead us from hence, where we may leisurely Each one demand an answer to his part Perform’d in this wide gap of time since first We were dissever’d: hastily lead away.","Oh, peace, Paulina! You should take a husband that I approve of, as I take a wife that you approve of. This is a contract, vowed between us. You have found mine, though I don’t know how, since I saw her and believed her to be dead, and I’ve futilely said several prayers on her grave. I won’t have to look far to find you an honorable husband, since I know his mind already. Come, Camillo, take her by the hand. Her worth and honesty is well known and affirmed by both Polixenes and me. Let’s leave this place. (to Hermione) Look at my brother! I beg both your pardons for having suspected sin in your innocent glances. This is your son-in-law, the son of Polixenes, who is engaged to your daughter. Good Paulina, lead us away from here, and we’ll each answer for what we’ve all done in this wide expanse of time since we first separated. Quickly, lead us away."
